<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>

<!--
The Project Gutenberg EBook of More Jonathan Papers by Elisabeth Woodbridge



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: More Jonathan Papers

Author: Elisabeth Woodbridge

Release Date: December 19, 2006 [Ebook #20141]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8
-->

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd">

<TEI.2 lang="en">

<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>More Jonathan Papers</title>
      <author><name reg="Woodbridge, Elisabeth">Elisabeth Woodbridge</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date value="2006-12-19">December 19, 2006</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">20141</idno>
      <idno type='DPid'>projectID453cb97c88c09</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        <title>More Jonathan Papers</title>
        <author>Elisabeth Woodbridge</author>
        <imprint>
          <publisher>The Riverside Press</publisher>
          <pubPlace>Cambridge</pubPlace>
          <date>1915</date>
        </imprint>
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
    <projectDesc>
      <p>Produced by Roland Schlenker
      and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
      &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/c&gt;.</p>
      <p>Page-images available at
      &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/projects/projectID453cb97c88c09/&gt;</p>
    </projectDesc>
    <editorialDecl>
      <p>The Proofreading and Formatting Guidelines Version 1.9.c,
      generated January 1, 2006 at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt; were
      used to transcribe this text.</p>
      <p>Corrections were made when it was obvious a mistake was made in the
      original text. An errata is supplied to locate these corrections.</p>
      <p>Normalizations were made to representation of time, 10.38 to 10:38.
      An errata is supplied to locate these normalizations.</p>
      <p>Contractions of the form would n't have be changed to wouldn't. No
      information has been kept as to the location of these changes.</p>
      <p>Contractions of the forms; 't and 'em; have not been changed.</p>
      <p>Quotation marks have been changed to TEI
      encoding &lt;q&gt; and &lt;/q&gt;.</p>
      <p>Hyphenated words at the end of line or end of page have had
      their hyphens removed. The second part of the hyphenated word
      has been moved to the previous line or page. No information
      has been kept as to the location of these changes.</p>
      <p>Characters not in ASCII 7-bit have been changed to TEI entities.</p>
    </editorialDecl>
    <classDecl>
      <taxonomy id="lc">
        <bibl>
          <title>Library of Congress Classification</title>
        </bibl>
      </taxonomy>
    </classDecl>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en">English</language>
    </langUsage>
    <textClass>
      <classCode scheme="lc">PS</classCode>
      <classCode scheme="lc">PZ</classCode>
      <keywords scheme="lc">
        <list>
          <item>American literature --
            By period -- 20th century</item>
          <item>American literature --
            Individual authors -- 1900-1960</item>
          <item>Fiction and juvenile belles lettres --
            Fiction in English</item>
        </list>
      </keywords>
    </textClass>
  </profileDesc>
   <revisionDesc>
 <change>
  <date value="2006-12-19">December 19, 2006</date>
  <respStmt>
  <name>Roland Schlenker and<lb /></name>
    <name>Online Distributed Proofreading Team</name>
  </respStmt>
  <item>Project Gutenberg Edition</item>
 </change>
 </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<text lang="en">

<front>
  <div>
    <divGen type="pgheader" />
  </div>

  <div>
    <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
  </div>

  <titlePage rend="page-break-before: right; text-align: center">
  <pb n="iiii"/><anchor id="Pgiiii"/>
    <docTitle>
      <titlePart type="main" rend="font-size: xx-large">
        More Jonathan Papers<lb/>
        <lb/>
      </titlePart>
    </docTitle>
    <byline rend="font-size: large">By<lb/>
      <docAuthor>Elisabeth Woodbridge</docAuthor><lb/>
      <lb/>
    </byline>
    <docImprint>
      BOSTON AND NEW YORK<lb/>
      HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY<lb/>
      The Riverside Press Cambridge<lb/>
    </docImprint>
    <docDate>1915</docDate>
  </titlePage>

  <div rend="page-break-before: always; text-align: center; font-size: x-small"
   type="verso">
    <pb n="v"/><anchor id="Pgv"/>
    <p>COPYRIGHT, 1915, BY ELISABETH WOODBRIDGE MORRIS<lb/>
    <lb/>
    ALL RIGHTS RESERVED<lb/>
    <lb/>
    <hi rend="font-style: italic">Published November 1915</hi></p>
  </div>

  <div rend="page-break-before: right" type="dedication">
    <pb n="vi"/><anchor id="Pgvi"/>
    <p rend="text-align: center">TO<lb/>
    JONATHAN</p>
  </div>

  <!-- <pb n="vii"/><anchor id="Pgvii"/>
  Blank Page -->

  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <pb n="viii"/><anchor id="Pgviii"/>
    <index index="pdf"/>
    <head rend="text-align: center">Contents</head>
    <divGen type="toc"/>
  </div>

  <!-- <pb n="ix"/><anchor id="Pgix"/>
  Blank Page -->
</front>

<body>

<div rend="page-break-before: right" id="chapter01">
<pb n="001"/><anchor id="Pg001"/>
<index index="toc" level1="I. The Searchings of Jonathan"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="I. The Searchings of Jonathan"/>
<head type="sub"><hi rend="font-size: xx-large">More Jonathan Papers</hi></head>
<head rend="text-align: center">I</head>
<head type="sub">The Searchings of Jonathan</head>

<p><q>What I find it hard to understand is, why a
person who can see a spray of fringed gentian
in the middle of a meadow can&rsquo;t see a book on
the sitting-room table.</q></p>

<p><q>The reason why I can see the gentian,</q>
said Jonathan, <q>is because the gentian is
there.</q></p>

<p><q>So is the book,</q> I responded.</p>

<p><q>Which table?</q> he asked.</p>

<p><q>The one with the lamp on it. It&rsquo;s a red
book, about <hi rend="font-style: italic">so</hi> big.</q></p>

<p><q>It isn&rsquo;t there; but, just to satisfy you,
I&rsquo;ll look again.</q></p>

<p>He returned in a moment with an argumentative
expression of countenance. <q>It
isn&rsquo;t there,</q> he said firmly. <q>Will anything
else do instead?</q></p>
<pb n="002"/><anchor id="Pg002"/>

<p><q>No, I wanted you to read that special
thing. Oh, dear! And I have all these things
in my lap! And I know it <hi rend="font-style: italic">is</hi>
there.</q></p>

<p><q>And I <hi rend="font-style: italic">know</hi> it
isn&rsquo;t.</q> He stretched himself
out in the hammock and watched me as
I rather ostentatiously laid down thimble,
scissors, needle, cotton, and material and set
out for the sitting-room table. There were a
number of books on it, to be sure. I glanced
rapidly through the piles, fingered the lower
books, pushed aside a magazine, and pulled
out from beneath it the book I wanted. I
returned to the hammock and handed it over.
Then, after possessing myself, again rather
ostentatiously, of material, cotton, needle,
scissors, and thimble, I sat down.</p>

<p><q>It&rsquo;s the second essay I specially thought
we&rsquo;d like,</q> I said.</p>

<p><q>Just for curiosity,</q> said Jonathan, with
an impersonal air, <q>where did you find it?</q></p>

<p><q>Find what?</q> I asked innocently.</p>

<p><q>The book.</q></p>

<p><q>Oh! On the table.</q></p>

<p><q>Which table?</q></p>

<p><q>The one with the lamp on it.</q></p>

<p><q>I should like to know where.</q></p>
<pb n="003"/><anchor id="Pg003"/>

<p><q>Why&mdash;just there&mdash;on the table. There
was an <q>Atlantic</q> on top of it, to be sure.</q></p>

<p><q>I saw the <q>Atlantic.</q> Blest if it looked as
though it had anything under it! Besides,
I was looking for it on top of things. You
said you laid it down there just before luncheon,
and I didn&rsquo;t think it could have crawled
in under so quick.</q></p>

<p><q>When you&rsquo;re looking for a thing,</q> I said,
<q>you mustn&rsquo;t think, you must look. Now
go ahead and read.</q></p>

<p>If this were a single instance, or even if it
were one of many illustrating a common
human frailty, it would hardly be worth setting
down. But the frailty under consideration
has come to seem to me rather particularly
masculine. Are not all the Jonathans
in the world continually being sent to some
sitting-room table for something, and coming
back to assert, with more or less pleasantness,
according to their temperament, that it is not
there? The incident, then, is not isolated; it
is typical of a vast group. For Jonathan, read
Everyman; for the red book, read any particular
thing that you want Him to bring;
for the sitting-room table, read the place
<pb n="004"/><anchor id="Pg004"/>
where you know it is and Everyman says it
isn&rsquo;t.</p>

<p>This, at least, is my thesis. It is not, however,
unchallenged. Jonathan has challenged
it when, from time to time, as occasion offered,
I have lightly sketched it out for him.
Sometimes he argues that my instances are
really isolated cases and that their evidence
is not cumulative, at others he takes refuge
in a <hi rend="font-style: italic">tu quoque</hi>&mdash;in
itself a confession of weakness&mdash;and
alludes darkly to <q>top shelves</q>
and <q>bottom drawers.</q> But let us have no
mysteries. These phrases, considered as arguments,
have their origin in certain incidents
which, that all the evidence may be in, I will
here set down.</p>

<p>Once upon a time I asked Jonathan to get
me something from the top shelf in the closet.
He went, and failed to find it. Then I went,
and took it down. Jonathan, watching over
my shoulder, said, <q>But that wasn&rsquo;t the top
shelf, I suppose you will admit.</q></p>

<p>Sure enough! There was a shelf above.
<q>Oh, yes; but I don&rsquo;t count that shelf. We
never use it, because nobody can reach
it.</q></p>
<pb n="005"/><anchor id="Pg005"/>

<p><q>How do you expect me to know which
shelves you count and which you don&rsquo;t?</q></p>

<p><q>Of course, anatomically&mdash;structurally&mdash;it
is one, but functionally it isn&rsquo;t there at all.</q></p>

<p><q>I see,</q> said Jonathan, so contentedly that
I knew he was filing this affair away for future
use.</p>

<p>On another occasion I asked him to get
something for me from the top drawer of the
old <q>high-boy</q> in the dining-room. He was
gone a long while, and at last, growing impatient,
I followed. I found him standing on
an old wooden-seated chair, screw-driver in
hand. A drawer on a level with his head was
open, and he had hanging over his arm
a gaudy collection of ancient table-covers
and embroidered scarfs, mostly in shades of
magenta.</p>

<p><q>She stuck, but I&rsquo;ve got her open now.
I don&rsquo;t see any pillow-cases, though. It&rsquo;s all
full of these things.</q> He pumped his laden
arm up and down, and the table-covers
wagged gayly.</p>

<p>I sank into the chair and laughed. <q>Oh!
Have you been prying at that all this time?
Of <hi rend="font-style: italic">course</hi> there&rsquo;s nothing in
<hi rend="font-style: italic">that</hi> drawer.</q></p>
<pb n="006"/><anchor id="Pg006"/>

<p><q>There&rsquo;s where you&rsquo;re wrong. There&rsquo;s a
great deal in it; I haven&rsquo;t taken out half. If
you want to see&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>I <hi rend="font-style: italic">don&rsquo;t</hi> want to see!
There&rsquo;s nothing I
want less! What I mean is&mdash;I never put
anything there.</q></p>

<p><q>It&rsquo;s the top drawer.</q> He was beginning
to lay back the table-covers.</p>

<p><q>But I can&rsquo;t reach it. And it&rsquo;s been stuck
for ever so long.</q></p>

<p><q>You said the top drawer.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, I suppose I did. Of course what I
meant was the top one of the ones I use.</q></p>

<p><q>I see, my dear. When you say top shelf
you don&rsquo;t mean top shelf, and when you say
top drawer you don&rsquo;t mean top drawer; in
fact, when you say top you don&rsquo;t mean top
at all&mdash;you mean the height of your head.
Everything above that doesn&rsquo;t count.</q></p>

<p>Jonathan was so pleased with this formulation
of my attitude that he was not in the
least irritated to have put out unnecessary
work. And his satisfaction was deepened by
one more incident. I had sent him to the
bottom drawer of my bureau to get a shawl.
He returned without it, and I was puzzled.
<pb n="007"/><anchor id="Pg007"/>
<q>Now, Jonathan, it&rsquo;s there, and it&rsquo;s the top
thing.</q></p>

<p><q>The real top,</q> murmured Jonathan, <q>or
just what you call top?</q></p>

<p><q>It&rsquo;s right in front,</q> I went on; <q>and I
don&rsquo;t see how even a man could fail to find it.</q></p>

<p>He proceeded to enumerate the contents
of the drawer in such strange fashion that I
began to wonder where he had been.</p>

<p><q>I said my bureau.</q></p>

<p><q>I went to your bureau.</q></p>

<p><q>The bottom drawer.</q></p>

<p><q>The bottom drawer. There was nothing
but a lot of little boxes and&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, <hi rend="font-style: italic">I</hi> know what you did!
You went to the secret drawer.</q></p>

<p><q>Isn&rsquo;t that the bottom one?</q></p>

<p><q>Why, yes, in a way&mdash;of course it is; but
it doesn&rsquo;t exactly count&mdash;it&rsquo;s not one of the
regular drawers&mdash;it hasn&rsquo;t any knobs, or
anything&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>But it&rsquo;s a perfectly good drawer.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes. But nobody is supposed to know
it&rsquo;s there; it looks like a molding&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>But I know it&rsquo;s there.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, of course.</q></p>
<pb n="008"/><anchor id="Pg008"/>

<p><q>And you know I know it&rsquo;s there.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, yes; but I just don&rsquo;t think about
that one in counting up. I see what you mean,
of course.</q></p>

<p><q>And I see what you mean. You mean that
your shawl is in the bottom one of the regular
drawers&mdash;with knobs&mdash;that can be alluded
to in general conversation. Now I think I can
find it.</q></p>

<p>He did. And in addition he amused himself
by working out phrases about <q>when is a
bottom drawer not a bottom drawer?</q> and
<q>when is a top shelf not a top shelf?</q></p>

<p>It is to these incidents&mdash;which I regard as
isolated and negligible, and he regards as
typical and significant&mdash;that he alludes on
the occasions when he is unable to find a red
book on the sitting-room table. In vain do I
point out that when language is variable and
fluid it is alive, and that there may be two
opinions about the structural top and the
functional top, whereas there can be but one
as to the book being or not being on the table.
He maintains a quiet cheerfulness, as of one
who is conscious of being, if not invulnerable,
at least well armed.</p>
<pb n="009"/><anchor id="Pg009"/>

<p>For a time he even tried to make believe
that he was invulnerable as well&mdash;to set up
the thesis that if the book was really on the
table he could find it. But in this he suffered
so many reverses that only strong natural
pertinacity kept him from capitulation.</p>

<p>Is it necessary to recount instances? Every
family can furnish them. As I allow myself to
float off into a reminiscent dream I find my
mind possessed by a continuous series of dissolving
views in which Jonathan is always
coming to me saying, <q>It isn&rsquo;t there,</q> and I
am always saying, <q>Please look again.</q></p>

<p>Though everything in the house seems to
be in a conspiracy against him, it is perhaps
with the fishing-tackle that he has most constant
difficulties.</p>

<p><q>My dear, have you any idea where my
rod is? No, don&rsquo;t get up&mdash;I&rsquo;ll look if you&rsquo;ll
just tell me where&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>Probably in the corner behind the chest
in the orchard room.</q></p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;ve looked there.</q></p>

<p><q>Well, then, did you take it in from the
wagon last night?</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, I remember doing it.</q></p>
<pb n="010"/><anchor id="Pg010"/>

<p><q>What about the little attic? You might
have put it up there to dry out.</q></p>

<p><q>No. I took my wading boots up, but that
was all.</q></p>

<p><q>The dining-room? You came in that
way.</q></p>

<p>He goes and returns. <q>Not there.</q> I reflect
deeply.</p>

<p><q>Jonathan, are you <hi rend="font-style: italic">sure</hi>
it&rsquo;s not in that corner of the orchard room?</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, I&rsquo;m sure; but I&rsquo;ll look again.</q> He
disappears, but in a moment I hear his voice
calling, <q>No! Yours is here, but not mine.</q></p>

<p>I perceive that it is a case for me, and I get
up. <q>You go and harness. I&rsquo;ll find it,</q> I call.</p>

<p>There was a time when, under such conditions,
I should have begun by hunting in all
the unlikely places I could think of. Now I
know better. I go straight to the corner of the
orchard room. Then I call to Jonathan, just
to relieve his mind.</p>

<p><q>All right! I&rsquo;ve found it.</q></p>

<p><q>Where?</q></p>

<p><q>Here, in the orchard room.</q></p>

<p><q><hi rend="font-style: italic">Where</hi> in the orchard
room?</q></p>

<p><q>In the corner.</q></p>
<pb n="011"/><anchor id="Pg011"/>

<p><q>What corner?</q></p>

<p><q>The usual corner&mdash;back of the chest.</q></p>

<p><q>The devil!</q> Then he comes back to put
his head in at the door. <q>What are you
laughing at?</q></p>

<p><q>Nothing. What are you talking about the
devil for? Anyway, it isn&rsquo;t the devil; it&rsquo;s the
brownie.</q></p>

<p>For there seems no doubt that the things
he hunts for are possessed of supernatural
powers; and the theory of a brownie in the
house, with a special grudge against Jonathan,
would perhaps best account for the way in
which they elude his search but leap into sight
at my approach. There is, to be sure, one
other explanation, but it is one that does not
suggest itself to him, or appeal to him when
suggested by me, so there is no need to dwell
upon it.</p>

<p>If it isn&rsquo;t the rod, it is the landing-net,
which has hung itself on a nail a little to the
left or right of the one he had expected to see
it on; or his reel, which has crept into a corner
of the tackle drawer and held a ball of string
in front of itself to distract his vision; or a
bunch of snell hooks, which, aware of its protective
<pb n="012"/><anchor id="Pg012"/>
coloring, has snuggled up against the
shady side of the drawer and tucked its pink-papered
head underneath a gay pickerel-spoon.</p>

<p>Fishing-tackle is, clearly, <q>possessed,</q> but
in other fields Jonathan is not free from
trouble. Finding anything on a bureau
seems to offer peculiar obstacles. It is perhaps
a big, black-headed pin that I want.
<q>On the pincushion, Jonathan.</q></p>

<p>He goes, and returns with two sizes of
safety-pins and one long hat-pin.</p>

<p><q>No, dear, those won&rsquo;t do. A small, black-headed
one&mdash;at least small compared with a
hat-pin, large compared with an ordinary pin.</q></p>

<p><q>Common or house pin?</q> he murmurs,
quoting a friend&rsquo;s phrase.</p>

<p><q>Do look again! I hate to drop this to go
myself.</q></p>

<p><q>When a man does a job, he gets his tools
together first.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes; but they say women shouldn&rsquo;t copy
men, they should develop along their own
lines. Please go.</q></p>

<p>He goes, and comes back. <q>You don&rsquo;t
want fancy gold pins, I suppose?</q></p>

<p><q>No, no! Here, you hold this, and I&rsquo;ll go.</q>
<pb n="013"/><anchor id="Pg013"/>
I dash to the bureau. Sure enough, he is right
about the cushion. I glance hastily about.
There, in a little saucer, are a half-dozen of
the sort I want. I snatch some and run back.</p>

<p><q>Well, it wasn&rsquo;t in the cushion, I bet.</q></p>

<p><q>No,</q> I admit; <q>it was in a saucer just behind
the cushion.</q></p>

<p><q>You said cushion.</q></p>

<p><q>I know. It&rsquo;s all right.</q></p>

<p><q>Now, if you had said simply <q>bureau,</q> I&rsquo;d
have looked in other places on it.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, you&rsquo;d have <hi rend="font-style: italic">looked</hi>
in other places!</q>
I could not forbear responding. There is, I
grant, another side to this question. One
evening when I went upstairs I found a partial
presentation of it, in the form of a little
newspaper clipping, pinned on my cushion.
It read as follows:&mdash;</p>

<quote rend="display">
  <p><q>My dear,</q> said she, <q>please run and
  bring me the needle from the haystack.</q></p>

  <p><q>Oh, I don&rsquo;t know which haystack.</q></p>

  <p><q>Look in all the haystacks&mdash;you
  can&rsquo;t miss it; there&rsquo;s only one needle.</q></p>
</quote>

<p>Jonathan was in the cellar at the moment.
When he came up, he said, <q>Did I hear any
one laughing?</q></p>
<pb n="014"/><anchor id="Pg014"/>

<p><q>I don&rsquo;t know. Did you?</q></p>

<p><q>I thought maybe it was you.</q></p>

<p><q>It might have been. Something amused
me&mdash;I forget what.</q></p>

<p>I accused Jonathan of having written it
himself, but he denied it. Some other Jonathan,
then; for, as I said, this is not a personal
matter, it is a world matter. Let us grant,
then, a certain allowance for those who hunt
in woman-made haystacks. But what about
pockets? Is not a man lord over his own
pockets? And are they not nevertheless as
so many haystacks piled high for his confusion?
Certain it is that Jonathan has nearly
as much trouble with his pockets as he does
with the corners and cupboards and shelves
and drawers of his house. It usually happens
over our late supper, after his day in town.
He sets down his teacup, struck with a sudden
memory. He feels in his vest pockets&mdash;first
the right, then the left. He proceeds to search
himself, murmuring, <q>I thought something
came to-day that I wanted to show you&mdash;oh,
here! no, that isn&rsquo;t it. I thought I put it&mdash;no,
those are to be&mdash;what&rsquo;s this? No,
that&rsquo;s a memorandum. Now, where in&mdash;</q>
<pb n="015"/><anchor id="Pg015"/>
He runs through the papers in his pockets
twice over, and in the second round I watch
him narrowly, and perhaps see a corner of an
envelope that does not look like office work.
<q>There, Jonathan! What&rsquo;s that? No, not
that&mdash;that!</q></p>

<p>He pulls it out with an air of immense
relief. <q>There! I knew I had something.
That&rsquo;s it.</q></p>

<p>When we travel, the same thing happens
with the tickets, especially if they chance to
be costly and complicated ones, with all the
shifts and changes of our journey printed
thick upon their faces. The conductor appears
at the other end of the car. Jonathan
begins vaguely to fumble without lowering
his paper. Pocket after pocket is browsed
through in this way. Then the paper slides to
his knee and he begins a more thorough investigation,
with all the characteristic clapping
and diving motions that seem to be
necessary. Some pockets must always be
clapped and others dived into to discover their
contents.</p>

<p>No tickets. The conductor is halfway up
the car. Jonathan&rsquo;s face begins to grow serious.
<pb n="016"/><anchor id="Pg016"/>
He rises and looks on the seat and under
it. He sits down and takes out packet after
packet of papers and goes over them with
scrupulous care. At this point I used to become
really anxious&mdash;to make hasty calculations
as to our financial resources, immediate
and ultimate&mdash;to wonder if conductors
ever really put nice people like us off trains.
But that was long ago. I know now that
Jonathan has never lost a ticket in his life.
So I glance through the paper that he has
dropped or watch the landscape until he
reaches a certain stage of calm and definite
pessimism, when he says, <q>I must have pulled
them out when I took out those postcards in
the other car. Yes, that&rsquo;s just what has happened.</q>
Then, the conductor being only a
few seats away, I beg Jonathan to look once
more in his vest pocket, where he always puts
them. To oblige me he looks, though without
faith, and lo! this time the tickets fairly
fling themselves upon him, with smiles almost
curling up their corners. Does the brownie
travel with us, then?</p>

<p>I begin to suspect that some of the good
men who have been blamed for forgetting to
<pb n="017"/><anchor id="Pg017"/>
mail letters in their pockets have been, not
indeed blameless, but at least misunderstood.
Probably they do not forget. Probably they
hunt for the letters and cannot find them, and
conclude that they have already mailed them.</p>

<p>In the matter of the home haystacks Jonathan&rsquo;s
confidence in himself has at last been
shaken. For a long time, when he returned
to me after some futile search, he used to say,
<q>Of course you can look for it if you like, but
it is <hi rend="font-style: italic">not</hi> there.</q>
But man is a reasoning, if not
altogether a reasonable, being, and with a sufficient
accumulation of evidence, especially
when there is some one constantly at hand to
interpret its teachings, almost any set of opinions,
however fixed, may be shaken. So here.</p>

<p>Once when we shut up the farm for the
winter I left my fountain pen behind. This
was little short of a tragedy, but I comforted
myself with the knowledge that Jonathan
was going back that week-end for a day&rsquo;s
hunt.</p>

<p><q>Be sure to get the pen first of all,</q> I said,
<q>and put it in your pocket.</q></p>

<p><q>Where is it?</q> he asked.</p>

<p><q>In the little medicine cupboard over the
<pb n="018"/><anchor id="Pg018"/>
fireplace in the orchard room, standing up at
the side of the first shelf.</q></p>

<p><q>Why not on your desk?</q> he asked.</p>

<p><q>Because I was writing tags in there, and
set it up so it would be out of the way.</q></p>

<p><q>And it <hi rend="font-style: italic">was</hi>
out of the way. All right. I&rsquo;ll
collect it.</q></p>

<p>He went, and on his return I met him with
eager hand&mdash;<q>My pen!</q></p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;m sorry,</q> he began.</p>

<p><q>You didn&rsquo;t forget!</q> I exclaimed.</p>

<p><q>No. But it wasn&rsquo;t there.</q></p>

<p><q>But&mdash;did you look?</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, I looked.</q></p>

<p><q>Thoroughly?</q></p>

<p><q>Yes. I lit three matches.</q></p>

<p><q>Matches! Then you didn&rsquo;t get it when
you first got there!</q></p>

<p><q>Why&mdash;no&mdash;I had the dog to attend
to&mdash;and&mdash;but I had plenty of time when I
got back, and it <hi rend="font-style: italic">wasn&rsquo;t</hi>
there.</q></p>

<p><q>Well&mdash;Dear me! Did you look anywhere
else? I suppose I may be mistaken.
Perhaps I did take it back to the desk.</q></p>

<p><q>That&rsquo;s just what I thought myself,</q> said
Jonathan. <q>So I went there, and looked, and
<pb n="019"/><anchor id="Pg019"/>
then I looked on all the mantelpieces and
your bureau. You must have put it in your
bag the last minute&mdash;bet it&rsquo;s there now!</q></p>

<p><q>Bet it isn&rsquo;t.</q></p>

<p>It wasn&rsquo;t. For two weeks more I was
driven to using other pens&mdash;strange and distracting
to the fingers and the eyes and the
mind. Then Jonathan was to go up again.</p>

<p><q>Please look once more,</q> I begged, <q>and
don&rsquo;t expect not to see it. I can fairly see it
myself, this minute, standing up there on the
right-hand side, just behind the machine oil
can.</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, I&rsquo;ll look,</q> he promised. <q>If
it&rsquo;s there, I&rsquo;ll find it.</q></p>

<p>He returned penless. I considered buying
another. But we were planning to go up together
the last week of the hunting season,
and I thought I would wait on the chance.</p>

<p>We got off at the little station and hunted
our way up, making great sweeps and jogs, as
hunters must, to take in certain spots we
thought promising&mdash;certain ravines and
swamp edges where we are always sure of
hearing the thunderous whir of partridge
wings, or the soft, shrill whistle of woodcock.
<pb n="020"/><anchor id="Pg020"/>
At noon we broiled chops and rested in the
lee of the wood edge, where, even in the late
fall, one can usually find spots that are warm
and still. It was dusk by the time we came
over the crest of the farm ledges and saw the
huddle of the home buildings below us, and
quite dark when we reached the house. Fires
had been made and coals smouldered on the
hearth in the sitting-room.</p>

<p><q>You light the lamp,</q> I said, <q>and I&rsquo;ll
just take a match and go through to see if
that pen <hi rend="font-style: italic">should</hi>
happen to be there.</q></p>

<p><q>No use doing anything to-night,</q> said
Jonathan. <q>To-morrow morning you can
have a thorough hunt.</q></p>

<p>But I took my match, felt my way into the
next room, past the fireplace, up to the cupboard,
then struck my match. In its first
flare-up I glanced in. Then I chuckled.</p>

<p>Jonathan had gone out to the dining-room,
but he has perfectly good ears.</p>

<p><q>NO!</q> he roared, and his tone of dismay,
incredulity, rage, sent me off into gales of
unscrupulous laughter. He was striding in,
candle in hand, shouting, <q>It was
<hi rend="font-style: italic">not there!</hi></q></p>

<p><q>Look yourself,</q> I managed to gasp.</p>
<pb n="021"/><anchor id="Pg021"/>

<p>This time, somehow, he could see it.</p>

<p><q>You planted it! You brought it up and
planted it!</q></p>

<p><q>I never! Oh, dear me! It pays for going
without it for weeks!</q></p>

<p><q><hi rend="font-style: italic">Nothing</hi>
will ever make me believe that
that pen was standing there when I looked
for it!</q> said Jonathan, with vehement finality.</p>

<p><q>All right,</q> I sighed happily. <q>You don&rsquo;t
have to believe it.</q></p>

<p>But in his heart perhaps he does believe it.
At any rate, since that time he has adopted a
new formula: <q>My dear, it may be there, of
course, but I don&rsquo;t see it.</q> And this position
I regard as unassailable.</p>

<p>One triumph he has had. I wanted something
that was stored away in the shut-up
town house.</p>

<p><q>Do you suppose you could find it?</q> I said,
as gently as possible.</p>

<p><q>I can try,</q> he said.</p>

<p><q>I think it is in a box about this shape&mdash;see?&mdash;a
gray box, in the attic closet, the
farthest-in corner.</q></p>

<p><q>Are you sure it&rsquo;s in the house? If it&rsquo;s in
the house, I think I can find it.</q></p>
<pb n="022"/><anchor id="Pg022"/>

<p><q>Yes, I&rsquo;m sure of that.</q></p>

<p>When he returned that night, his face wore
a look of satisfaction very imperfectly concealed
beneath a mask of nonchalance.</p>

<p><q><hi rend="font-style: italic">Good</hi> for you!
Was it where I said?</q></p>

<p><q>No.</q></p>

<p><q>Was it in a different corner?</q></p>

<p><q>No.</q></p>

<p><q>Where was it?</q></p>

<p><q>It wasn&rsquo;t in a corner at all. It wasn&rsquo;t in
that closet.</q></p>

<p><q>It wasn&rsquo;t! Where, then?</q></p>

<p><q>Downstairs in the hall closet.</q> He paused,
then could not forbear adding, <q>And it wasn&rsquo;t
in a gray box; it was in a big hat-box with
violets all over it.</q></p>

<p><q>Why, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Jonathan!</hi>
Aren&rsquo;t you grand! How
did you ever find it? I couldn&rsquo;t have done
better myself.</q></p>

<p>Under such praise he expanded. <q>The
fact is,</q> he said confidentially, <q>I had given
it up. And then suddenly I changed my
mind. I said to myself, <q>Jonathan, don&rsquo;t
be a man! Think what she&rsquo;d do if she
were here now.</q> And then I got busy and
found it.</q></p>
<pb n="023"/><anchor id="Pg023"/>

<p><q>Jonathan!</q> I could almost have wept if
I had not been laughing.</p>

<p><q>Well,</q> he said, proud, yet rather sheepish,
<q>what is there so funny about that? I gave
up half a day to it.</q></p>

<p><q>Funny! It isn&rsquo;t funny&mdash;exactly. You
don&rsquo;t mind my laughing a little? Why, you&rsquo;ve
lived down the fountain pen&mdash;we&rsquo;ll forget
the pen&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, no, you won&rsquo;t forget the pen either,</q>
he said, with a certain pleasant grimness.</p>

<p><q>Well, perhaps not&mdash;of course it would
be a pity to forget that. Suppose I say, then,
that we&rsquo;ll always regard the pen in the light
of the violet hat-box?</q></p>

<p><q>I think that might do.</q> Then he had an
alarming afterthought. <q>But, see here&mdash;you
won&rsquo;t expect me to do things like that often?</q></p>

<p><q>Dear me, no! People can&rsquo;t live always on
their highest levels. Perhaps you&rsquo;ll
<hi rend="font-style: italic">never</hi>
do it again.</q> Jonathan looked distinctly relieved.
<q>I&rsquo;ll accept it as a unique effort&mdash;like
Dante&rsquo;s angel and Raphael&rsquo;s sonnet.</q></p>

<p><q>Jonathan,</q> I said that evening, <q>what
do you know about St. Anthony of Padua?</q></p>

<p><q>Not much.</q></p>
<pb n="024"/><anchor id="Pg024"/>

<p><q>Well, you ought to. He helped you to-day.
He&rsquo;s the saint who helps people to find lost
articles. Every man ought to take him as
a patron saint.</q></p>

<p><q>And do you know which saint it is who
helps people to find lost virtues&mdash;like humility,
for instance?</q></p>

<p><q>No. I don&rsquo;t, really.</q></p>

<p><q>I didn&rsquo;t suppose you did,</q> said Jonathan.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="chapter02">
<pb n="025"/><anchor id="Pg025"/>
<index index="toc" level1="II. Sap-Time"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="II. Sap-Time"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">II</head>
<head type="sub">Sap-Time</head>

<p>It was a little tree-toad that began it. In a
careless moment he had come down to the
bench that connects the big maple tree with
the old locust stump, and when I went out at
dusk to wait for Jonathan, there he sat, in
plain sight. A few experimental pokes sent
him back to the tree, and I studied him there,
marveling at the way he assimilated with its
bark. As Jonathan came across the grass I
called softly, and pointed to the tree.</p>

<p><q>Well?</q> he said.</p>

<p><q>Don&rsquo;t you see?</q></p>

<p><q>No. What?</q></p>

<p><q>Look&mdash;I thought you had eyes!</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, what a little beauty!</q></p>

<p><q>And isn&rsquo;t his back just like bark and
lichens! And what are those things in the tree
beside him?</q></p>

<p><q>Plugs, I suppose.</q></p>

<p><q>Plugs?</q></p>
<pb n="026"/><anchor id="Pg026"/>

<p><q>Yes. After tapping. Uncle Ben used to
tap these trees, I believe.</q></p>

<p><q>You mean for sap? Maple syrup?</q></p>

<p><q>Yes.</q></p>

<p><q>Jonathan! I didn&rsquo;t know these were
sugar maples.</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, yes. These on the road.</q></p>

<p><q>The whole row? Why, there are ten or
fifteen of them! And you never told me!</q></p>

<p><q>I thought you knew.</q></p>

<p><q>Knew! I don&rsquo;t know anything&mdash;I should
think you&rsquo;d know that, by this time. Do you
suppose, if I had known, I should have let all
these years go by&mdash;oh, dear&mdash;think of all
the fun we&rsquo;ve missed! And syrup!</q></p>

<p><q>You&rsquo;d have to come up in February.</q></p>

<p><q>Well, then, I&rsquo;ll
<hi rend="font-style: italic">come</hi> in February. Who&rsquo;s
afraid of February?</q></p>

<p><q>All right. Try it next year.</q></p>

<p>I did. But not in February. Things happened,
as things do, and it was early April before
I got to the farm. But it had been a
wintry March, and the farmers told me that
the sap had not been running except for a few
days in a February thaw. Anyway, it was
worth trying.</p>
<pb n="027"/><anchor id="Pg027"/>

<p>Jonathan could not come with me. He was
to join me later. But Hiram found a bundle
of elder spouts in the attic, and with these
and an auger we went out along the snowy,
muddy road. The hole was bored&mdash;a pair
of them&mdash;in the first tree, and the spouts
driven in. I knelt, watching&mdash;in fact, peering
up the spout-hole to see what might happen.
Suddenly a drop, dim with sawdust, appeared&mdash;gathered,
hesitated, then ran down
gayly and leapt off the end.</p>

<p><q>Look! Hiram! It&rsquo;s running!</q> I called.</p>

<p>Hiram, boring the next tree, made no response.
He evidently expected it to run.
Jonathan would have acted just like that, too,
I felt sure. Is it a masculine quality, I wonder,
to be unmoved when the theoretically expected
becomes actual? Or is it that some
temperaments have naturally a certain large
confidence in the sway of law, and refuse to
wonder at its individual workings? To me the
individual workings give an ever fresh thrill
because they bring a new realization of the
mighty powers behind them. It seems to depend
on which end you begin at.</p>

<p>But though the little drops thrilled me, I
<pb n="028"/><anchor id="Pg028"/>
was not beyond setting a pail underneath to
catch them. And as Hiram went on boring, I
followed with my pails. Pails, did I say?
Pails by courtesy. There were, indeed, a few
real pails&mdash;berry-pails, lard-pails, and water-pails&mdash;but
for the most part the sap fell into
pitchers, or tin saucepans, stew-kettles of
aluminum or agate ware, blue and gray and
white and mottled, or big yellow earthenware
bowls. It was a strange collection of receptacles
that lined the roadside when we had
finished our progress. As I looked along the
row, I laughed, and even Hiram smiled.</p>

<p>But what next? Every utensil in the house
was out there, sitting in the road. There was
nothing left but the wash-boiler. Now, I had
heard tales of amateur syrup-boilings, and I
felt that the wash-boiler would not do. Besides,
I meant to work outdoors&mdash;no kitchen
stove for me! I must have a pan, a big, flat
pan. I flew to the telephone, and called up
the village plumber, three miles away. Could
he build me a pan? Oh, say, two feet by three
feet, and five inches high&mdash;yes, right away.
Yes, Hiram would call for it in the afternoon.</p>

<p>I felt better. And now for a fireplace! Oh,
<pb n="029"/><anchor id="Pg029"/>
Jonathan! Why did you have to be away!
For Jonathan loves a stone and knows how
to put stones together, as witness the stone
<q>Eyrie</q> and the stile in the lane. However,
there Jonathan wasn&rsquo;t. So I went out into
the swampy orchard behind the house and
looked about&mdash;no lack of stones, at any rate.
I began to collect material, and Hiram, seeing
my purpose, helped with the big stones.
Somehow my fireplace got made&mdash;two side
walls, one end wall, the other end left open
for stoking. It was not as pretty as if Jonathan
had done it, but <q>&rsquo;t was enough, &rsquo;t would
serve.</q> I collected fire-wood, and there I was,
ready for my pan, and the afternoon was yet
young, and the sap was drip-drip-dripping
from all the spouts. I could begin to boil next
day. I felt that I was being borne along on
the providential wave that so often floats the
inexperienced to success.</p>

<p>That night I emptied all my vessels into
the boiler and set them out once more. A
neighbor drove by and pulled up to comment
benevolently on my work.</p>

<p><q>Will it run to-night?</q> I asked him.</p>

<p><q>No&mdash;no&mdash;&rsquo;t won&rsquo;t run to-night. Too
<pb n="030"/><anchor id="Pg030"/>
cold. &rsquo;T won&rsquo;t run any to-night. You can
sleep all right.</q></p>

<p>This was pleasant to hear. There was a
moon, to be sure, but it was growing colder,
and at the idea of crawling along that road in
the middle of the night even my enthusiasm
shivered a little.</p>

<p>So I made my rounds at nine, in the white
moonlight, and went to sleep.</p>

<p>I was awakened the next morning to a consciousness
of flooding sunshine and Hiram&rsquo;s
voice outside my window.</p>

<p><q>Got anything I can empty sap into? I&rsquo;ve
got everything all filled up.</q></p>

<p><q>Sap! Why, it isn&rsquo;t running yet, is it?</q></p>

<p><q>Pails were flowin&rsquo; over when I came out.</q></p>

<p><q>Flowing over! They said the sap wouldn&rsquo;t
run last night.</q></p>

<p><q>I guest there don&rsquo;t nobody know when
sap&rsquo;ll run and when it won&rsquo;t,</q> said Hiram
peacefully, as he tramped off to the barn.</p>

<p>In a few minutes I was outdoors. Sure
enough, Hiram had everything full&mdash;old
boilers, feed-pails, water-pails. But we found
some three-gallon milk-cans and used them.
A farm is like a city. There are always things
<pb n="031"/><anchor id="Pg031"/>
enough in it for all purposes. It is only a
question of using its resources.</p>

<p>Then, in the clear April sunshine, I went
out and surveyed the row of maples. How
they did drip! Some of them almost ran. I
felt as if I had turned on the faucets of the
universe and didn&rsquo;t know how to turn them
off again.</p>

<p>However, there was my new pan. I set it
over my oven walls and began to pour in sap.
Hiram helped me. He seemed to think he
needed his feed-pails. We poured in sap and
we poured in sap. Never did I see anything
hold so much as that pan. Even Hiram was
stirred out of his usual calm to remark, <q>It
beats all, how much that holds.</q> Of course
Jonathan would have had its capacity all calculated
the day before, but my methods are
empirical, and so I was surprised as well as
pleased when all my receptacles emptied
themselves into its shallow breadths and still
there was a good inch to allow for boiling up.
Yes, Providence&mdash;my exclusive little fool&rsquo;s
Providence&mdash;was with me. The pan, and
the oven, were a success, and when Jonathan
came that night I led him out with unconcealed
<pb n="032"/><anchor id="Pg032"/>
pride and showed him the pan&mdash;now
a heaving, frothing mass of sap-about-to-be-syrup,
sending clouds of white steam down
the wind. As he looked at the oven walls,
I fancied his fingers ached to get at them,
but he offered no criticism, seeing that they
worked.</p>

<p>The next day began overcast, but Providence
was merely preparing for me a special
little gift in the form of a miniature snowstorm.
It was quite real while it lasted. It
whitened the grass and the road, it piled itself
softly among the clusters of swelling buds on
the apple trees, and made the orchard look as
though it had burst into bloom in an hour.
Then the sun came out, there were a few
dazzling moments when the world was all
blue and silver, and then the whiteness faded.</p>

<p>And the sap! How it dripped! Once an
hour I had to make the rounds, bringing back
gallons each time, and the fire under my pan
was kept up so that the boiling down might
keep pace with the new supply.</p>

<p><q>They do say snow makes it run,</q> shouted
a passer-by, and another called, <q>You want
to keep skimmin&rsquo;!</q> Whereupon I seized my
<pb n="033"/><anchor id="Pg033"/>
long-handled skimmer and fell to work.
Southern Connecticut does not know much
about syrup, but by the avenue of the road I
was gradually accumulating such wisdom as
it possessed.</p>

<p>The syrup was made. No worse accident
befell than the occasional overflowing of a
pail too long neglected. The syrup was made,
and bottled, and distributed to friends, and
was the pride of the household through the
year.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<p><q>This time I will go early,</q> I said to Jonathan;
<q>they say the late running is never
quite so good.</q></p>

<p>It was early March when I got up there
this time&mdash;early March after a winter whose
rigor had known practically no break. Again
Jonathan could not come, but Cousin Janet
could, and we met at the little station, where
Hiram was waiting with Kit and the surrey.
The sun was warm, but the air was keen and
the woods hardly showed spring at all yet,
even in that first token of it, the slight thickening
of their millions of little tips, through
the swelling of the buds. The city trees already
<pb n="034"/><anchor id="Pg034"/>
showed this, but the country ones still
kept their wintry penciling of vanishing lines.</p>

<p>Spring was in the road, however. <q>There
ain&rsquo;t no bottom to this road now, it&rsquo;s just
dropped clean out,</q> remarked a fellow teamster
as we wallowed along companionably
through the woods. But, somehow, we
reached the farm. Again we bored our holes,
and again I was thrilled as the first bright
drops slipped out and jeweled the ends of the
spouts. I watched Janet. She was interested
but calm, classing herself at once with Hiram
and Jonathan. We unearthed last year&rsquo;s
oven and dug out its inner depths&mdash;leaves
and dirt and apples and ashes&mdash;it was like
excavating through the seven Troys to get to
bottom. We brought down the big pan, now
clothed in the honors of a season&rsquo;s use, and
cleaned off the cobwebs incident to a year&rsquo;s
sojourn in the attic. By sunset we had a panful
of sap boiling merrily and already taking
on a distinctly golden tinge. We tasted it. It
was very syrupy. Letting the fire die down,
we went in to get supper in the utmost content
of spirit.</p>

<p><q>It&rsquo;s so much simpler than last year,</q> I
<pb n="035"/><anchor id="Pg035"/>
said, as we sat over our cozy <q>tea,</q>&mdash;<q>having
the pan and the oven ready-made, and
all&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>You don&rsquo;t suppose anything could happen
to it while we&rsquo;re in here?</q> suggested
Janet. <q>Shan&rsquo;t I just run out and see?</q></p>

<p><q>No, sit still. What could happen? The
fire&rsquo;s going out.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, I know.</q> But her voice was uncertain.</p>

<p><q>You see, I&rsquo;ve been all through it once,</q> I
reassured her.</p>

<p>As we rose, Janet said, <q>Let&rsquo;s go out before
we do the dishes.</q> And to humor her I agreed.
We lighted the lantern and stepped out on the
back porch. It was quite dark, and as we
looked off toward the fireplace we saw gleams
of red.</p>

<p><q>How funny!</q> I murmured. <q>I didn&rsquo;t
think there was so much fire left.</q></p>

<p>We felt our way over, through the yielding
mud of the orchard, and as I raised the lantern
we stared in dazed astonishment. The pan
was a blackened mass, lit up by winking red
eyes of fire. I held the lantern more closely.
I seized a stick and poked&mdash;the crisp black
<pb n="036"/><anchor id="Pg036"/>
stuff broke and crumbled into an empty and
blackening pan. A curious odor arose.</p>

<p><q>It couldn&rsquo;t have!</q> gasped Janet.</p>

<p><q>It couldn&rsquo;t&mdash;but it has!</q> I said.</p>

<p>It was a matter for tears, or rage, or
laughter. And laughter won. When we recovered
a little we took up the black shell of
carbon that had once been syrup-froth; we
laid it gently beside the oven, for a keepsake.
Then we poured water in the pan, and steam
rose hissing to the stars.</p>

<p><q>Does it leak?</q> faltered Janet.</p>

<p><q>Leak!</q> I said. I was on my knees now,
watching the water stream through the
parted seam of the pan bottom, down into the
ashes below.</p>

<p><q>The question is,</q> I went on as I got up,
<q>did it boil away because it leaked, or did it
leak because it boiled away?</q></p>

<p><q>I don&rsquo;t see that it matters much,</q> said
Janet. She was showing symptoms of depression
at this point.</p>

<p><q>It matters a great deal,</q> I said. <q>Because,
you see, we&rsquo;ve got to tell Jonathan,
and it makes all the difference how we put
it.</q></p>
<pb n="037"/><anchor id="Pg037"/>

<p><q>I see,</q> said Janet; then she added, experimentally,
<q>Why tell Jonathan?</q></p>

<p><q>Why, Janet, you know better! I wouldn&rsquo;t
miss telling Jonathan for anything. What is
Jonathan <hi rend="font-style: italic">for!</hi></q></p>

<p><q>Well&mdash;of course,</q> she conceded. <q>Let&rsquo;s
do dishes.</q></p>

<p>We sat before the fire that evening and I
read while Janet knitted. Between my eyes
and the printed page there kept rising a vision&mdash;a
vision of black crust, with winking red
embers smoldering along its broken edges. I
found it distracting in the extreme.&hellip;</p>

<p>At some time unknown, out of the blind
depths of the night, I was awakened by a
voice:&mdash;</p>

<p><q>It&rsquo;s beginning to rain. I think I&rsquo;ll just
go out and empty what&rsquo;s near the house.</q></p>

<p><q>Janet!</q> I murmured, <q>don&rsquo;t be absurd.</q></p>

<p><q>But it will dilute all that sap.</q></p>

<p><q>There isn&rsquo;t any sap to dilute. It won&rsquo;t
be running at night.</q> After a while the voice,
full of propitiatory intonations, resumed:&mdash;</p>

<p><q>My dear, you don&rsquo;t mind if I slip out. It
will only take a minute.</q></p>

<p><q>I do mind. Go to sleep!</q></p>
<pb n="038"/><anchor id="Pg038"/>

<p>Silence. Then:&mdash;</p>

<p><q>It&rsquo;s raining harder. I hate to think of all
that sap&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>You don&rsquo;t <hi rend="font-style: italic">have</hi>
to think!</q> I was quite
savage. <q>Just go to sleep&mdash;and let me!</q>
Another silence. Then a fresh downpour.
The voice was pleading:&mdash;</p>

<p><q><hi rend="font-style: italic">Please</hi>
let me go! I&rsquo;ll be back in a minute.
And it&rsquo;s not cold.</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, well&mdash;I&rsquo;m awake now, anyway.
<hi rend="font-style: italic">I&rsquo;ll</hi>
go.</q> My voice was tinged with that high
resignation that is worse than anger. Janet&rsquo;s
tone changed instantly:&mdash;</p>

<p><q>No, no! Don&rsquo;t! Please don&rsquo;t! I&rsquo;m going.
I truly don&rsquo;t mind.</q></p>

<p><q><hi rend="font-style: italic">I&rsquo;m</hi>
going. I don&rsquo;t mind, either, not at all.</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, dear! Then let&rsquo;s not either of us go.</q></p>

<p><q>That was my idea in the first place.</q></p>

<p><q>Well, then, we won&rsquo;t. Go to sleep, and I
will too.</q></p>

<p><q>Not at all! I&rsquo;ve decided to go.</q></p>

<p><q>But it&rsquo;s stopped raining. Probably it
won&rsquo;t rain any more.</q></p>

<p><q>Then what are you making all this fuss
for?</q></p>
<pb n="039"/><anchor id="Pg039"/>

<p><q>I didn&rsquo;t make a fuss. I just thought I
could slip out&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>Well, you couldn&rsquo;t. And it&rsquo;s raining very
hard again. And I&rsquo;m going.</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, don&rsquo;t! You&rsquo;ll get drenched.</q></p>

<p><q>Of course. But I can&rsquo;t bear to have all
that sap diluted.</q></p>

<p><q>It doesn&rsquo;t run at night. You said it
didn&rsquo;t.</q></p>

<p><q>You said it did.</q></p>

<p><q>But I don&rsquo;t really know. You know best.</q></p>

<p><q>Why didn&rsquo;t you think of that sooner?
Anyway, I&rsquo;m going.</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, dear! You make me feel as if I&rsquo;d
stirred you up&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>You have,</q> I interrupted, sweetly. <q>I
won&rsquo;t deny that you
<hi rend="font-style: italic">have</hi> stirred me up. But
now that you have mentioned it</q>&mdash;I felt
for a match&mdash;<q>now that you have mentioned
it, I see that this was the one thing
needed to make my evening complete, or
perhaps it&rsquo;s morning&mdash;I don&rsquo;t know.</q></p>

<p>We found the dining-room warm, and soon
we were equipped in those curious compromises
of vesture that people adopt under such
circumstances, and, with lantern and umbrella,
<pb n="040"/><anchor id="Pg040"/>
we fumbled our way out to the trees.
The rain was driving in sheets, and we
plodded up the road in the yellow circle of
lantern-light wavering uncertainly over the
puddles, while under our feet the mud gave
and sucked.</p>

<p><q>It&rsquo;s diluted, sure enough,</q> I said, as we
emptied the pails. We crawled slowly back,
with our heavy milk-can full of sap-and-rain-water,
and went in.</p>

<p>The warm dining-room was pleasant to return
to, and we sat down to cookies and milk,
feeling almost cozy.</p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;ve always wanted to know how it would
be to go out in the middle of the night this
way,</q> I remarked, <q>and now I know.</q></p>

<p><q>Aren&rsquo;t you hateful!</q> said Janet.</p>

<p><q>Not at all. Just appreciative. But now,
if you haven&rsquo;t any
<hi rend="font-style: italic">other</hi> plan, we&rsquo;ll go back
to bed.</q></p>

<p>It was half-past eight when we waked next
morning. But there was nothing to wake up
for. The old house was filled with the rain-noises
that only such an old house knows.
On the little windows the drops pricked
sharply; in the fireplace with the straight flue
<pb n="041"/><anchor id="Pg041"/>
they fell, hissing, on the embers. On the
porch roofs the rain made a dull patter of
sound; on the tin roof of the <q>little attic</q>
over the kitchen it beat with flat resonance.
In the big attic, when we went up to see if all
was tight, it filled the place with a multitudinous
clamor; on the sides of the house it drove
with a fury that re-echoed dimly within doors.</p>

<p>Outside, everything was afloat. We visited
the trees and viewed with consternation the
torrents of rain-water pouring into the pails.
We tried fastening pans over the spouts to
protect them. The wind blew them merrily
down the road. It would have been easy
enough to cover the pails, but how to let the
sap drip in and the rain drip out&mdash;that was
the question.</p>

<p><q>It seems as if there was a curse on the
syrup this year,</q> said Janet.</p>

<p><q>The trouble is,</q> I said, <q>I know just
enough to have lost my hold on the fool&rsquo;s
Providence, and not enough really to take
care of myself.</q></p>

<p><q>Superstition!</q> said Janet.</p>

<p><q>What do you call your idea of the curse?</q>
I retorted. <q>Anyway, I have an idea! Look,
<pb n="042"/><anchor id="Pg042"/>
Janet! We&rsquo;ll just cut up these enamel-cloth
table-covers here by the sink and everywhere,
and tack them around the spouts.</q></p>

<p>Janet&rsquo;s thrifty spirit was doubtful. <q>Don&rsquo;t
you need them?</q></p>

<p><q>Not half so much as the trees do. Come
on! Pull them off. We&rsquo;ll have to have fresh
ones this summer, anyway.</q></p>

<p>We stripped the kitchen tables and the
pantry and the milk-room. We got tacks and
a hammer and scissors, and out we went again.
We cut a piece for each tree, just enough to
go over each pair of spouts and protect the
pail. When tacked on, it had the appearance
of a neat bib, and as the pattern was a blue
and white check, the effect, as one looked
down the road at the twelve trees, was very
fresh and pleasing. It seemed to cheer the
people who drove by, too.</p>

<p>But the bibs served their purpose, and the
sap dripped cozily into the pails without any
distraction from alien elements. Sap doesn&rsquo;t
run in the rain, they say, but this sap did.
Probably Hiram was right, and you can&rsquo;t tell.
I am glad if you can&rsquo;t. The physical mysteries
of the universe are being unveiled so
<pb n="043"/><anchor id="Pg043"/>
swiftly that one likes to find something that
still keeps its secret&mdash;though, indeed, the
spiritual mysteries seem in no danger of such
enforcement.</p>

<p>The next day the rain stopped, the floods
began to subside, and Jonathan managed to
arrive, though the roads had even less <q>bottom
to &rsquo;em</q> than before. The sun blazed out,
and the sap ran faster, and, after Jonathan
had fully enjoyed them, the blue and white
bibs were taken off. Somehow in the clear
March sunshine they looked almost shocking.
By the next day we had syrup enough to try
for sugar.</p>

<p>For on sugar my heart was set. Syrup was
all very well for the first year, but now it
had to be sugar. Moreover, as I explained to
Janet, when it came to sugar, being absolutely
ignorant, I was again in a position to expect
the aid of the fool&rsquo;s Providence.</p>

<p><q>How much <hi rend="font-style: italic">do</hi>
you know about it?</q> asked Janet.</p>

<p><q>Oh, just what people say. It seems to be
partly like fudge and partly like molasses
candy. You boil it, and then you beat it, and
then you pour it off.</q></p>
<pb n="044"/><anchor id="Pg044"/>

<p><q>I&rsquo;ve got more to go on than that,</q> said
Jonathan. <q>I came up on the train with the
Judge. He used to see it done.</q></p>

<p><q>You&rsquo;ve got to drive Janet over to her
train to-night; Hiram can&rsquo;t,</q> I said.</p>

<p><q>All right. There&rsquo;s time enough.</q></p>

<p>We sat down to early supper, and took
turns running out to the kitchen to <q>try</q>
the syrup as it boiled down. At least we said
we would take turns, but usually we all three
went. Supper seemed distinctly a side issue.</p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;m going to take it off now,</q> said Jonathan.
<q>Look out!</q></p>

<p><q>Do you think it&rsquo;s time?</q> I demurred.</p>

<p><q>We&rsquo;ll know soon,</q> said Jonathan, with
his usual composure.</p>

<p>We hung over him. <q>Now you beat it,</q> I
said. But he was already beating.</p>

<p><q>Get some cold water to set it in,</q> he commanded.
We brought the dishpan with water
from the well, where ice still floated.</p>

<p><q>Maybe you oughtn&rsquo;t to stir so much&mdash;do
you think?</q> I suggested, helpfully. <q>Beat
it more&mdash;up, you know.</q></p>

<p><q>More the way you would eggs,</q> said
Janet.</p>
<pb n="045"/><anchor id="Pg045"/>

<p><q>I&rsquo;ll show you.</q> I lunged at the spoon.</p>

<p><q>Go away! This isn&rsquo;t eggs,</q> said Jonathan,
beating steadily.</p>

<p><q>Your arm must be tired. Let me take it,</q>
pleaded Janet.</p>

<p><q>No, me!</q> I said. <q>Janet, you&rsquo;ve got to
get your coat and things. You&rsquo;ll have to start
in fifteen minutes. Here, Jonathan, you need
a fresh arm.</q></p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;m fresh enough.</q></p>

<p><q>And I really don&rsquo;t think you have the
motion.</q></p>

<p><q>I have motion enough. This is my job.
You go and help Janet.</q></p>

<p><q>Janet&rsquo;s all right.</q></p>

<p><q>So am I. See how white it&rsquo;s getting. The
Judge said&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>Here come Hiram and Kit,</q> announced
Janet, returning with bag and wraps. <q>But
you have ten minutes. Can&rsquo;t I help?</q></p>

<p><q>He won&rsquo;t let us. He&rsquo;s that
&lsquo;sot,&rsquo;</q> I murmured. <q>He&rsquo;ll
make you miss your train.</q></p>

<p><q>You <hi rend="font-style: italic">could</hi>
butter the pans,</q> he counter charged,
<q>and you haven&rsquo;t.</q></p>

<p>We flew to prepare, and the pouring began.
<pb n="046"/><anchor id="Pg046"/>
It was a thrilling moment. The syrup, or
sugar, now a pale hay color, poured out
thickly, blob-blob-blob, into the little pans.
Janet moved them up as they were needed,
and I snatched the spoon, at last, and encouraged
the stuff to fall where it should. But
Jonathan got it from me again, and scraped
out the remnant, making designs of clovers
and polliwogs on the tops of the cakes. Then
a dash for coats and hats and a rush to the
carriage.</p>

<p>When the surrey disappeared around the
turn of the road, I went back, shivering, to
the house. It seemed very empty, as houses
will, being sensitive things. I went to the
kitchen. There on the table sat a huddle of
little pans, to cheer me, and I fell to work
getting things in order to be left in the morning.
Then I went back to the fire and waited
for Jonathan. I picked up a book and tried
to read, but the stillness of the house was
too importunate, it had to be listened to. I
leaned back and watched the fire, and the old
house and I held communion together.</p>

<p>Perhaps in no other way is it possible to get
quite what I got that evening. It was partly
<pb n="047"/><anchor id="Pg047"/>
my own attitude; I was going away in the
morning, and I had, in a sense, no duties
toward the place. The magazines of last fall
lay on the tables, the newspapers of last fall
lay beside them. The dust of last fall was,
doubtless, in the closets and on the floors. It
did not matter. For though I was the mistress
of the house, I was for the moment even more
its guest, and guests do not concern themselves
with such things as these.</p>

<p>If it had been really an empty house, I
should have been obliged to think of these
things, for in an empty house the dust speaks
and the house is still, dumbly imprisoned in
its own past. On the other hand, when a
house is filled with life, it is still, too; it is
absorbed in its own present. But when one
sojourns in a house that is merely resting, full
of the life that has only for a brief season left
it, ready for the life that is soon to return&mdash;then
one is in the midst of silences that are
not empty and hollow, but richly eloquent.
The house is the link that joins and interprets
the living past and the living future.</p>

<p>Something of this I came to feel as I sat
there in the wonderful stillness. There were
<pb n="048"/><anchor id="Pg048"/>
no house noises such as generally form the
unnoticed background of one&rsquo;s consciousness&mdash;the
steps overhead, the distant voices, the
ticking of the clock, the breathing of the dog
in the corner. Even the mice and the chimney-swallows
had not come back, and I missed the
scurrying in the walls and the flutter of wings
in the chimney. The fire purred low, now and
then the wind sighed gently about the corner
of the <q>new part,</q> and a loose door-latch
clicked as the draught shook it. A branch
drew back and forth across a window-pane
with the faintest squeak. And little by little
the old house opened its heart. All that it
told me I hardly yet know myself. It gathered
up for me all its past, the past that I had
known and the past that I had not known.
Time fell away. My own importance dwindled.
I seemed a very small part of the life
of the house&mdash;very small, yet wholly belonging
to it. I felt that it absorbed me as it
absorbed the rest&mdash;those before and after
me&mdash;for time was not.</p>

<p>There was the sound of slow wheels outside,
the long roll of the carriage-house door,
and the trampling of hoofs on the flooring
<pb n="049"/><anchor id="Pg049"/>
within. Then the clinking of the lantern and
the even tread of feet on the path behind the
house, a gust of raw snow-air&mdash;and the house
fell silent so that Jonathan might come in.</p>

<p><q>Your sugar is hardening nicely, I see,</q>
he said, rubbing his hands before the fire.</p>

<p><q>Yes,</q> I said. <q>You know I
<hi rend="font-style: italic">told</hi> Janet
that for this part of the affair we could trust
to the fool&rsquo;s Providence.</q></p>

<p><q>Thank you,</q> said Jonathan.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="chapter03">
<pb n="050"/><anchor id="Pg050"/>
<index index="toc" level1="III. Evenings on the Farm"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="III. Evenings on the Farm"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">III</head>
<head type="sub">Evenings on the Farm</head>

<epigraph>
  <cit>
    <quote rend="pre: none; post: none">
      <lg>
        <l>I&rsquo;m going out to clean the pasture spring;</l>
        <l>I&rsquo;ll only stop to rake the leaves away</l>
        <l>(And wait to watch the water clear, I may);</l>
        <l>I shan&rsquo;t be gone long.&mdash;You come too.</l>
        <l>&nbsp;</l>
        <l>I&rsquo;m going out to fetch the little calf</l>
        <l>That&rsquo;s standing by the mother. It&rsquo;s so young,</l>
        <l>It totters when she licks it with her tongue.</l>
        <l>I shan&rsquo;t be gone long.&mdash;You come too.</l>
      </lg>
      <bibl>
        <author><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Robert Frost</hi></author>.
      </bibl>
    </quote>
  </cit>
</epigraph>

<p>When we first planned to take up the farm
we looked forward with especial pleasure to
our evenings. They were to be the quiet
rounding-in of our days, full of companionship,
full of meditation. <q>We&rsquo;ll do lots of
reading aloud,</q> I said. <q>And we&rsquo;ll have long
walks. There won&rsquo;t be much to do
<hi rend="font-style: italic">but</hi> walk
and read. I can hardly wait.</q> And I chose
our summer books with special reference to
reading aloud.</p>

<p><q>Of course,</q> I said, as we fell to work at
our packing, <q>we&rsquo;ll have to do all sorts of
things first. But the days are so long up there,
and the life is very simple. And in the evenings
<pb n="051"/><anchor id="Pg051"/>
you&rsquo;ll help. We ought to be settled in a
week.</q></p>

<p><q>Or two&mdash;or three,</q> suggested Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>Three! What is there to do?</q></p>

<p><q>Farm-life isn&rsquo;t so blamed simple as you
think.</q></p>

<p><q>But what <hi rend="font-style: italic">is</hi>
there to do? Now, listen!
One day for trunks, one day for boxes and
barrels, one day for closets, that&rsquo;s three, one
for curtains, four, one day for&mdash;for the garret,
that&rsquo;s five. Well&mdash;one day for odds and
ends that I haven&rsquo;t thought of. That&rsquo;s
liberal, I&rsquo;m sure.</q></p>

<p><q>Better say the rest of your life for the
odds and ends you haven&rsquo;t thought of,</q> said
Jonathan, as he drove the last nail in a neatly
headed barrel.</p>

<p><q>Jonathan, why are you such a pessimist?</q></p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;m not, except when you&rsquo;re such an
optimist.</q></p>

<p><q>If I&rsquo;d begun by saying it would take a
month, would you have said a week?</q></p>

<p><q>Can&rsquo;t tell. Might have.</q></p>

<p><q>Anyway, there&rsquo;s nothing bad about odds
and ends. They&rsquo;re about all women have
much to do with most of their lives.</q></p>
<pb n="052"/><anchor id="Pg052"/>

<p><q>That&rsquo;s what I said. And you called me a
pessimist.</q></p>

<p><q>I didn&rsquo;t call you one. I said, why were
you one.</q></p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;m sorry. My mistake,</q> said Jonathan
with the smile of one who scores.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<p>And so we went.</p>

<p>One day for trunks was all right. Any one
can manage trunks. And the second day, the
boxes were emptied and sent flying out to the
barn. Curtains I decided to keep for evening
work, while Jonathan read. That left the
closets and the attic, or rather the attics, for
there was one over the main house and one
over the <q>new part,</q>&mdash;still <q>new,</q> although
now some seventy years old. They were
known as the attic and the little attic. I
thought I would do the closets first, and I began
with the one in the parlor. This was built
into the chimney, over the fireplace. It was
low, and as long as the mantelpiece itself. It
had two long shelves shut away behind three
glass doors through which the treasures within
were dimly visible. When I swung these open
it felt like opening a tomb&mdash;cold, musty
<pb n="053"/><anchor id="Pg053"/>
air hung about my face. I brushed it aside,
and considered where to begin. It was a depressing
collection. There were photographs
and photographs, some in frames, the rest of
them tied up in packages or lying in piles. A
few had names or messages written on the
back, but most gave no clue; and all of them
gazed out at me with that expression of complete
respectability that constitutes so impenetrable
a mask for the personality behind.
Most of us wear such masks, but the older
photographers seem to have been singularly
successful in concentrating attention on them.
Then there were albums, with more photographs,
of people and of <q>views.</q> There was
a big Bible, some prayer-books, and a few
other books elaborately bound with that
heavy fancifulness that we are learning to call
Victorian. One of these was on <q>The Wonders
of the Great West</q>; another was about
<q>The Female Saints of America.</q> I took it
down and glanced through it, but concluded
that one had to be a female saint, or at least
an aspirant, to appreciate it. Then there were
things made out of dried flowers, out of hair,
out of shells, out of pine-cones. There were
<pb n="054"/><anchor id="Pg054"/>
vases and other ornamental bits of china and
glass, also Victorian, looking as if they were
meant to be continually washed or dusted by
the worn, busy fingers of the female saints. As
I came to fuller realization of all these relics,
my resolution flickered out and there fell upon
me a strange numbness of spirit. I seemed
under a spell of inaction. Everything behind
those glass doors had been cherished too long
to be lightly thrown away, yet was not old
enough to be valuable nor useful enough to
keep. I spent a long day&mdash;one of the longest
days of my life&mdash;browsing through the books,
trying to sort the photographs, and glancing
through a few old letters. I did nothing in
particular with anything, and in the late afternoon
I roused myself, put them all back, and
shut the glass doors. I had nothing to show
for my day&rsquo;s experience except a deep little
round ache in the back of my neck and a faint
brassy taste in my mouth. I complained of it
to Jonathan later.</p>

<p><q>It always tasted just that way to me when
I was a boy,</q> he said, <q>but I never thought
much about it&mdash;I thought it was just a
closet-taste.</q></p>
<pb n="055"/><anchor id="Pg055"/>

<p><q>And it isn&rsquo;t only the taste,</q> I went on.
<q>It does something to me, to my state of
mind. I&rsquo;m afraid to try the garret.</q></p>

<p><q>Garrets are different,</q> said Jonathan.
<q>But I&rsquo;d leave them. They can wait.</q></p>

<p><q>They&rsquo;ve waited a good while, of course,</q>
I said.</p>

<p>And so we left the garrets. We came back
to them later, and were glad we had done so.
But that is a story by itself.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<p>Meanwhile, in the evenings, Jonathan
helped.</p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;m afraid you were more or less right
about the odd jobs,</q> I admitted one night.
<q>They do seem to accumulate.</q> I was holding
a candle while he set up a loose latch.</p>

<p><q>They&rsquo;ve been accumulating a good many
years,</q> said Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>Yes, that&rsquo;s it. And so the doors all stick,
and the latches won&rsquo;t latch, and the shades
are sulky or wild, and the pantry shelves&mdash;have
you noticed?&mdash;they&rsquo;re all warped so
they rock when you set a dish on them.</q></p>

<p><q>And the chairs pull apart,</q> added Jonathan.</p>
<pb n="056"/><anchor id="Pg056"/>

<p><q>Yes. Of course after we catch up we&rsquo;ll be
all right.</q></p>

<p><q>I wouldn&rsquo;t count too much on catching
up.</q></p>

<p><q>Why not?</q> I asked.</p>

<p><q>The farm has had a long start.</q></p>

<p><q>But you&rsquo;re a Yankee,</q> I argued; <q>the
Yankee nature fairly feeds on such jobs&mdash;&lsquo;putter
jobs,&rsquo; you know.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, I know.</q></p>

<p><q>Only, of course, you get on faster if you&rsquo;re
not too particular about having the exact
tool&mdash;</q></p>

<p>Considered as a Yankee, Jonathan&rsquo;s only
fault is that when he does a job he likes to
have a very special tool to do it with. Often
it is so special that I have never heard its
name before and then I consider he is going
too far. He merely thinks I haven&rsquo;t gone far
enough. Perhaps such matters must always
remain matters of opinion. But even with
this handicap we did begin to catch up, and
we could have done this a good deal faster if
it had not been for the pump.</p>

<p>The pump was a clear case of new wine in
an old bottle. It was large and very strong.
<pb n="057"/><anchor id="Pg057"/>
The people who worked it were strong too.
But the walls and floor to which it was attached
were not strong at all. And so, one
night, when Jonathan wanted a walk I was
obliged instead to suggest the pump.</p>

<p><q>What&rsquo;s the matter there?</q></p>

<p><q>Why, it seems to have pulled clear of its
moorings. You look at it.</q></p>

<p>He looked, with that expression of meditative
resourcefulness peculiar to the true
Yankee countenance. <q>H&rsquo;m&mdash;needs new
wood there,&mdash;and there; that stuff&rsquo;ll never
hold.</q> And so the old bottle was patched with
new skin at the points of strain, and in the zest
of reconstruction Jonathan almost forgot to
regret the walk. <q>We&rsquo;ll have it to-morrow
night,</q> he said: <q>the moon will be better.</q></p>

<p>The next evening I met him below the turn of
the road. <q>Wonderful night it&rsquo;s going to be,</q>
he said, as he pushed his wheel up the last hill.</p>

<p><q>Yes&mdash;</q> I said, a little uneasily. I was
thinking of the kitchen pump. Finally I
brought myself to face it.</p>

<p><q>There seems to be some trouble&mdash;with
the pump,</q> I said apologetically. I felt that
it was my fault, though I knew it wasn&rsquo;t.</p>
<pb n="058"/><anchor id="Pg058"/>

<p><q>More trouble? What sort of trouble?</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, it wheezes and makes funny sucking
noises, and the water spits and spits, and then
bursts out, and then doesn&rsquo;t come at all. It
sounds a little like a cat with a bone in its
throat.</q></p>

<p><q>Probably just that,</q> said Jonathan:
<q>grain of sand in the valve, very likely.</q></p>

<p><q>Shall I get a plumber?</q></p>

<p><q>Plumber! I&rsquo;ll fix it myself in three shakes
of a lamb&rsquo;s tail.</q></p>

<p><q>Well,</q> I said, relieved: <q>you can do that
after supper while I see that all the chickens
are in, and those turkeys, and then we&rsquo;ll have
our walk.</q></p>

<p>Accordingly I went off on my tour. When
I returned the pale moon-shadows were already
beginning to show in the lingering dusk
of the fading daylight. Indoors seemed very
dark, but on the kitchen floor a candle sat,
flaring and dipping.</p>

<p><q>Jonathan,</q> I called, <q>I&rsquo;m ready.</q></p>

<p><q>Well, I&rsquo;m not,</q> said a voice at my feet.</p>

<p><q>Why, where are you? Oh, there!</q> I bent
down and peered under the sink at a shape
crouched there. <q>Haven&rsquo;t you finished?</q></p>
<pb n="059"/><anchor id="Pg059"/>

<p><q>Finished! I&rsquo;ve just got the thing apart.</q></p>

<p><q>I should say you had!</q> I regarded the
various pieces of iron and leather and wood as
they lay, mere dismembered shapes, about
the dim kitchen.</p>

<p><q>It doesn&rsquo;t seem as if it would ever come
together again&mdash;to be a pump,</q> I said in
some depression.</p>

<p><q>Oh, that&rsquo;s easy! It&rsquo;s just a question of
time.</q></p>

<p><q>How much time?</q></p>

<p><q>Heaven knows.</q></p>

<p><q>Was it the valve?</q></p>

<p><q>It was&mdash;several things.</q></p>

<p>His tone had the vagueness born of concentration.
I could see that this was no time to
press for information. Besides, in the field
of mechanics, as Jonathan has occasionally
pointed out to me, I am rather like a traveler
who has learned to ask questions in a foreign
tongue, but not to understand the answers.</p>

<p><q>Well, I&rsquo;ll bring my sewing out here&mdash;or
would you rather have me read to you?
There&rsquo;s something in the last number of&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>No&mdash;get your sewing&mdash;blast that
screw! Why doesn&rsquo;t it start?</q></p>
<pb n="060"/><anchor id="Pg060"/>

<p>Evidently sewing was better than the last
number of anything. I settled myself under
a lamp, while Jonathan, in the twilight beneath
the sink, continued his mystic rites,
with an accompaniment of mildly vituperative
or persuasive language, addressed sometimes
to his tools, sometimes to the screws
and nuts and other parts, sometimes against
the men who made them or the plumbers who
put them in. Now and then I held a candle,
or steadied some perverse bit of metal while
he worked his will upon it. And at last the
ph&oelig;nix did indeed rise, the pump was again
a pump,&mdash;at least it looked like one.</p>

<p><q>Suppose it doesn&rsquo;t work,</q> I suggested.</p>

<p><q>Suppose it does,</q> said Jonathan.</p>

<p>He began to pump furiously. <q>Pour in
water there!</q> he directed. <q>Keep on pouring&mdash;don&rsquo;t
stop&mdash;never mind if she does spout.</q>
I poured and he pumped, and there were the
usual sounds of a pump resuming activity:
gurglings and spittings, suckings and sudden
spoutings; but at last it seemed to get its
breath&mdash;a few more long strokes of the
handle, and the water poured.</p>

<p><q>What time is it?</q> he asked.</p>
<pb n="061"/><anchor id="Pg061"/>

<p><q>Oh, fairly late&mdash;about ten&mdash;ten minutes
past.</q></p>

<p>Instead of our walk, we stood for a moment
under the big maples before the house
and looked out into a sea of moonlight. It
silvered the sides of the old gray barns and
washed over the blossoming apple trees beyond
the house. Is there anything more
sweetly still than the stillness of moonlight
over apple blossoms! As we went out to
the barns to lock up, even the little hencoops
looked poetic. Passing one of them, we half
roused the feathered family within and heard
muffled peepings and a smothered <hi rend="font-style: italic">clk-clk</hi>.
Jonathan was by this time so serene that I
felt I could ask him a question that had occurred
to me.</p>

<p><q>Jonathan, how long <hi rend="font-style: italic">is</hi>
three shakes of a lamb&rsquo;s tail?</q></p>

<p><q>Apparently, my dear, it is the whole evening,</q>
he answered unruffled.</p>

<p>The next night was drizzly. Well, we would
have books instead of a walk. We lighted a
fire, May though it was, and settled down before
it. <q>What shall we read?</q> I asked, feeling
very cozy.</p>
<pb n="062"/><anchor id="Pg062"/>

<p>Jonathan was filling his pipe with a leisurely
deliberation good to look upon. With the
match in his hand he paused&mdash;<q>Oh, I meant
to tell you&mdash;those young turkeys of yours&mdash;they
were still out when I came through
the yard. I wonder if they went in all right.</q></p>

<p>I have always noticed that if the turkeys
grow up very fat and strutty and suggestive
of Thanksgiving, Jonathan calls them <q>our
turkeys,</q> but in the spring, when they are
committing all the naughtinesses of wild and
silly youth, he is apt to allude to them as
<q>those young turkeys of yours.</q></p>

<p>I rose wearily. <q>No. They never go in all
right when they get out at this time&mdash;especially
on wet nights. I&rsquo;ll have to find them
and stow them.</q></p>

<p>Jonathan got up, too, and laid down his
pipe. <q>You&rsquo;ll need the lantern,</q> he said.</p>

<p>We went out together into the May drizzle&mdash;a
good thing to be out in, too, if you are
out for the fun of it. But when you are hunting
silly little turkeys who literally don&rsquo;t
know enough to go in when it rains, and when
you expected and wanted to be doing something
else, then it seems different, the drizzle
<pb n="063"/><anchor id="Pg063"/>
seems peculiarly drizzly, the silliness of the
turkeys seems particularly and unendurably
silly.</p>

<p>We waded through the drenched grass and
the tall, dripping weeds, listening for the
faint, foolish peeping of the wanderers. Some
we found under piled fence rails, some under
burdock leaves, some under nothing more
protective than a plantain leaf. By ones and
twos we collected them, half drowned yet
shrilly remonstrant, and dropped them into
the dry shed where they belonged. Then we
returned to the house, very wet, feeling the
kind of discouragement that usually besets
those who are forced to furnish prudence to
fools.</p>

<p><q>Nine o&rsquo;clock,</q> said Jonathan, <q>and we&rsquo;re
too wet to sit down. If you could just shut in
those turkeys on wet days&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>Shut them in! Didn&rsquo;t I shut them in!
They must have got out since four o&rsquo;clock.</q></p>

<p><q>Isn&rsquo;t the shed tight?</q> he asked.</p>

<p><q>Chicken-tight, but not turkey-tight, apparently.
Nothing is turkey-tight.</q></p>

<p><q>They&rsquo;re bigger than chickens.</q></p>

<p><q>Not in any one spot they aren&rsquo;t. They&rsquo;re
<pb n="064"/><anchor id="Pg064"/>
like coiled wire&mdash;when they stretch out to
get through a crack they have <hi rend="font-style: italic">no</hi> dimension
except length, their bodies are mere imaginary
points to hang feathers on. You don&rsquo;t
know little turkeys.</q></p>

<p>It might be said that, having undertaken
to raise turkeys, we had to expect them to act
like turkeys. But there were other interruptions
in our evenings where our share of responsibility
was not so plain. For example,
one wet evening in early June we had kindled
a little fire and I had brought the lamp forward.
The pump was quiescent, the little
turkeys were all tucked up in the turkey
equivalent for bed, the farm seemed to be
cuddling down into itself for the night. We
sat for a moment luxuriously regarding the
flames, listening to the sighing of the wind,
feeling the sweet damp air as it blew in
through the open windows. I was considering
which book it should be and at last rose to
possess myself of two or three.</p>

<p><q>Sh&mdash;h&mdash;h!</q> said Jonathan, a warning
finger raised.</p>

<p>I stood listening.</p>

<p><q>I don&rsquo;t hear anything,</q> I said.</p>
<pb n="065"/><anchor id="Pg065"/>

<p><q>Sh&mdash;h!</q> he repeated. <q>There!</q></p>

<p>This time, indeed, I heard faint bird-notes.</p>

<p><q>Young robins!</q> He sprang up and made
for the back door with long strides.</p>

<p>I peered out through the window of the
orchard room, but saw only the reflection of
the firelight and the lamp. Suddenly I heard
Jonathan whistle and I ran to the back porch.
Blackness pressed against my eyes.</p>

<p><q>Where are you?</q> I called into it.</p>

<p>The whistle again, quite near me, apparently
out of the air.</p>

<p><q>Bring a lantern,</q> came a whisper.</p>

<p>I got it and came back and down the steps
to the path, holding up my light and peering
about in search of the voice.</p>

<p><q>Where are you? I can&rsquo;t see you at all.</q></p>

<p><q>Right here&mdash;look&mdash;here&mdash;up!</q> The
voice was almost over my head.</p>

<p>I searched the dark masses of the tree&mdash;oh,
yes! the lantern revealed the heel of a
shoe in a crotch, and above,&mdash;yes, undoubtedly,
the rest of Jonathan, stretched out along
a limb.</p>

<p><q>Oh! What are you doing up there?</q></p>

<p><q>Get me a long stick&mdash;hoe&mdash;clothes-pole&mdash;anything
<pb n="066"/><anchor id="Pg066"/>
I can poke with. Quick!
The cat&rsquo;s up here. I can hear her, but I can&rsquo;t
see her.</q></p>

<p>I found the rake and reached it up to him.
From the dark beyond him came a distressed
mew.</p>

<p><q>Now the lantern. Hang it on the teeth.</q>
He drew it up to him, then, rake in one hand
and lantern in the other, proceeded to squirm
out along the limb.</p>

<p><q>Now I see her.</q></p>

<p>I saw her too&mdash;a huddle of yellow,
crouched close.</p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;ll have her in a minute. She&rsquo;ll either
have to drop or be caught.</q></p>

<p>And in fact this distressing dilemma was
already becoming plain to the marauder herself.
Her mewings grew louder and more
frequent. A few more contortions brought
the climber nearer his victim. A little judicious
urging with the rake and she was within
reach. The rake came down to me, and a
long, wild mew announced that Jonathan had
clutched.</p>

<p><q>I don&rsquo;t see how you&rsquo;re going to get down,</q>
I said, mopping the rain-mist out of my eyes.</p>
<pb n="067"/><anchor id="Pg067"/>

<p><q>Watch me,</q> panted the contortionist.</p>

<p>I watched a curious mass descend the
tree, the lantern, swinging and jerking, fitfully
illumined the pair, and I could see, now
a knee and an ear, now a hand and a yellow
furry shape, now a white collar, nose, and
chin. There was a last, long, scratching slide.
I snatched the lantern, and Jonathan stood
beside me, holding by the scruff of her neck
a very much frazzled yellow cat. We returned
to the porch where her victims were&mdash;one
alive, in a basket, two dead, beside it, and
Jonathan, kneeling, held the cat&rsquo;s nose close
to the little bodies while he boxed her ears&mdash;once,
twice; remonstrant mews rose wild,
and with a desperate twist the culprit backed
out under his arm and leaped into the blackness.</p>

<p><q>Don&rsquo;t believe she&rsquo;ll eat young robin for a
day or two,</q> said Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>Is that what they were? Where were
they?</q></p>

<p><q>Under the tree. She&rsquo;d knocked them
out.</q></p>

<p><q>Could you put this one back? He seems
all right&mdash;only sort of naked in spots.</q></p>
<pb n="068"/><anchor id="Pg068"/>

<p><q>We&rsquo;ll half cover the basket and hang it
in the tree. His folks&rsquo;ll take care of him.</q></p>

<p>Next morning early there began the greatest
to-do among the robins in the orchard.
They shrieked their comments on the affair
at the top of their lungs. They screamed
abusively at Jonathan and me as we stood
watching. <q>They say we did it!</q> said Jonathan.
<q>I call that gratitude!</q></p>

<p>I wish I could record that from that evening
the cat was a reformed character. An
impression had indeed been made. All next
day she stayed under the porch, two glowing
eyes in the dark. The second day she came
out, walking indifferent and debonair, as cats
do. But when Jonathan took down the basket
from the tree and made her smell of it,
she flattened her ears against her head and
shot under the porch again.</p>

<p>But lessons grow dim and temptation is
freshly importunate. It was not two weeks
before Jonathan was up another tree on the
same errand, and when I considered the number
of nests in our orchard, and the number
of cats&mdash;none of them really our cats&mdash;on
the place, I felt that the position of overruling
<pb n="069"/><anchor id="Pg069"/>
Providence was almost more than we could
undertake, if we hoped to do anything else.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<p>These things&mdash;tinkering of latches and
chairs, pump-mending, rescue work in the
orchard and among the poultry&mdash;filled our
evenings fairly full. Yet these are only samples,
and not particularly representative
samples either. They were the sort of things
that happened oftenest, the common emergencies
incidental to the life. But there were
also the uncommon emergencies, each occurring
seldom but each adding its own touch
of variety to the tale of our evenings.</p>

<p>For instance, there was the time of the
great drought, when Jonathan, coming in
from a tour of the farm at dusk, said, <q>I&rsquo;ve
got to go up and dig out the spring-hole
across the swamp. Everything else is dry,
and the cattle are getting crazy.</q></p>

<p><q>Can I help?</q> I asked, not without regrets
for our books and our evening&mdash;it was
a black night, and I had had hopes.</p>

<p><q>Yes. Come and hold the lantern.</q></p>

<p>We went. The spring-hole had been trodden
by the poor, eager creatures into a useless
<pb n="070"/><anchor id="Pg070"/>
jelly of mud. Jonathan fell to work,
while I held the lantern high. But soon it
became more than a mere matter of holding
the lantern. There was a crashing in the
blackness about us and a huge horned head
emerged behind my shoulder, another loomed
beyond Jonathan&rsquo;s stooping bulk.</p>

<p><q>Keep &rsquo;em back,</q> he said. <q>They&rsquo;ll have
it all trodden up again&mdash;Hi! You! Ge&rsquo;
back &rsquo;ere!</q> There is as special a lingo for
talking to cattle as there is for talking to
babies. I used it as well as I could. I swung
the lantern in their faces, I brandished the
hoe-handle at them, I jabbed at them recklessly.
They snorted and backed and closed
in again,&mdash;crazy, poor things, with the
smell of the water. It was an evening&rsquo;s battle
for us. Jonathan dug and dug, and then laid
rails, and the precious water filled in slowly,
grew to a dark pool, and the thirsty creatures
panted and snuffed in the dark just outside
the radius of the hoe-handle, until at last we
could let them in. I had forgotten my books,
for we had come close to the earth and the
creatures of the earth. The cows were our
sisters and the steers our brothers that night.</p>
<pb n="071"/><anchor id="Pg071"/>

<p>Sometimes the emergency was in the barn&mdash;a
broken halter and trouble among the
horses, or perhaps a new calf. Sometimes a
stray creature,&mdash;cow or horse,&mdash;grazing
along the roadside, got into our yard and
threatened our corn and squashes and my
poor, struggling flower-beds. Once it was a
break in the wire fence around Jonathan&rsquo;s
muskmelon patch in the barn meadow. The
cows had just been turned in, and if it wasn&rsquo;t
mended that evening it meant no melons
that season, also melon-tainted cream for days.</p>

<p>Once or twice each year it was the drainpipe
from the sink. The drain, like the pump,
was an innovation. Our ancestors had always
carried out whatever they couldn&rsquo;t use
or burn, and dumped it on the far edge of the
orchard. In a thinly settled community,
there is much to be said for this method:
you know just where you are. But we had the
drain, and occasionally we didn&rsquo;t know just
where we were.</p>

<p><q>Coffee grounds,</q> Jonathan would suggest,
with a touch of sternness.</p>

<p><q>No,</q> I would reply firmly; <q>coffee
grounds are always burned.</q></p>
<pb n="072"/><anchor id="Pg072"/>

<p><q>What then?</q></p>

<p><q>Don&rsquo;t know. I&rsquo;ve poked and poked.</q></p>

<p>A gleam in the corner of Jonathan&rsquo;s eye&mdash;<q>What
with?</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, everything.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, I suppose so. For instance what?</q></p>

<p><q>Why&mdash;hair-pin first, of course, and then
scissors, and then button-hook&mdash;you needn&rsquo;t
smile. Button-hooks are wonderful for
cleaning out pipes. And then I took a pail-handle
and straightened it out&mdash;</q> Jonathan
was laughing by this time&mdash;<q>Well, I
have to use what I have, don&rsquo;t I?</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, of course. And after the pail-handle?</q></p>

<p><q>After that&mdash;oh, yes. I tried your cleaning-rod.</q></p>

<p><q>The devil you did!</q></p>

<p><q>Not at all. It wasn&rsquo;t hurt a bit. It just
wouldn&rsquo;t go down, that&rsquo;s all. So then I
thought I&rsquo;d wait for you.</q></p>

<p><q>And now what do you expect?</q></p>

<p><q>I expect you to fix it.</q></p>

<p>Of course, after that, there was nothing for
Jonathan to do but fix it. Usually it did not
take long. Sometimes it did. Once it took a
<pb n="073"/><anchor id="Pg073"/>
whole evening, and required the services of a
young tree, which Jonathan went out and cut
and trimmed and forced through a section of
the pipe which he had taken up and laid out
for the operation on the kitchen floor. It was
a warm evening, too, and friends had driven
over to visit us. We received them warmly in
the kitchen. We explained that we believed
in making them members of the family, and
that members of the family always helped in
whatever was being done. So they helped.
They took turns gripping the pipe while
Jonathan and I persuaded the young tree
through it. It required great strength and
some skill because it was necessary to make
the tree and the pipe perform spirally rotatory
movements each antagonistic and complementary
to the other. We were all rather
tired and very hot before anything began to
happen. Then it happened all at once: the
tree burst through&mdash;and not alone. A good
deal came with it. The kitchen floor was a
sight, and there was&mdash;undoubtedly there
was&mdash;a strong smell of coffee. Jonathan
smiled. Then he went down cellar and restored
the pipe to its position, while the rest
<pb n="074"/><anchor id="Pg074"/>
of us cleared up the kitchen,&mdash;it&rsquo;s astonishing
what a little job like that can make a
kitchen look like,&mdash;and as our friends started
to go a voice from beneath us, like the ghost
in <q>Hamlet,</q> shouted, <q>Hold &rsquo;em! There&rsquo;s
half a freezer of ice-cream down here we can
finish.</q> Sure enough there was! And then
he wouldn&rsquo;t have to pack it down. We had
it up. We looted the pantry as only irresponsible
adults can loot, in their own pantry,
and the evening ended in luxurious ease.
Some time in the black of the night our
friends left, and I suppose the sound of their
carriage-wheels along the empty road set
many a neighbor wondering, through his
sleep, <q>Who&rsquo;s sick now?</q> How could they
know it was only a plumbing party?</p>

<p>As I look back on this evening it seems one
of the pleasantest of the year. It isn&rsquo;t so
much what you do, of course, as the way you
feel about it, that makes the difference between
pleasant and unpleasant. Shall we say
of that evening that we meant to read aloud?
Or that we meant to have a quiet evening
with friends? Not at all. We say, with all the
conviction in the world, that we meant, on
<pb n="075"/><anchor id="Pg075"/>
that particular evening, to have a plumbing
party, with the drain as the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">piÃ¨ce de rÃ©sistance</hi>.
Toward this our lives had been yearning,
and lo! they had arrived!</p>

<p>Some few things, however, are hard to
meet in that spirit. When the pigs broke out
of the pen, about nine o&rsquo;clock, and Hiram
was away, and Mrs. Hiram needed our help
to get them in&mdash;there was no use in pretending
that we meant to do it. Moreover, the
labor of rounding up pigs is one of mingled
arduousness and delicacy. Pigs in clover
was once a popular game, but pigs in a dark
orchard is not a game at all, and it will, I am
firmly convinced, never be popular. It is, I
repeat, not a game, yet probably the only
way to keep one&rsquo;s temper at all is to regard
it, for the time being, as a major sport, like
football and deep-sea fishing and mountain-climbing,
where you are expected to take
some risks and not think too much about results
as such. On this basis it has, perhaps,
its own rewards. But the attitude is difficult
to maintain, especially late at night.</p>

<p>On that particular evening, as we returned,
breathless and worn, to the house, I could
<pb n="076"/><anchor id="Pg076"/>
not refrain from saying, with some edge, <q>I
never wanted to keep pigs anyway.</q></p>

<p><q>Who says we&rsquo;re keeping them?</q> remarked
Jonathan; and then we laughed and laughed.</p>

<p><q>You needn&rsquo;t think I&rsquo;m laughing because
you said anything specially funny,</q> I said.
<q>It&rsquo;s only because I&rsquo;m tired enough to laugh
at anything.</q></p>

<p>The pump, too, tried my philosophy now
and then. One evening when I had worn my
hands to the bone cutting out thick leather
washers for Jonathan to insert somewhere in
the circulatory system of that same monster,
I finally broke out, <q>Oh, dear! I hate the
pump! I wanted a moonlight walk!</q></p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;ll have the thing together now in a
jiffy,</q> said Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>Jiffy! There&rsquo;s no use talking about jiffies
at half-past ten at night,</q> I snarled. I
was determined anyway to be as cross as I
liked. <q>Why can&rsquo;t we find a really simple
way of living? This isn&rsquo;t simple. It&rsquo;s highly
complex and very difficult.</q></p>

<p><q>You cut those washers very well,</q> suggested
Jonathan soothingly, but I was not
prepared to be soothed.</p>
<pb n="077"/><anchor id="Pg077"/>

<p><q>It was hateful work, though. Now, look
what we&rsquo;ve done this evening! We&rsquo;ve shut
up a setting hen, and housed the little turkeys,
and driven that cow back into the road,
and mended a window-shade and the dog&rsquo;s
chain, and now we&rsquo;ve fixed the pump&mdash;and
it won&rsquo;t stay fixed at that!</q></p>

<p><q>Fair evening&rsquo;s work,</q> murmured Jonathan
as he rapidly assembled the pump.</p>

<p><q>Yes, as work. But all I mean is&mdash;it isn&rsquo;t
<hi rend="font-style: italic">simple</hi>.
Farm life has a reputation for simplicity
that I begin to think is overdone. It
doesn&rsquo;t seem to me that my evening has been
any more simple than if we had dressed for
dinner and gone to the opera or played bridge.
In fact, at this distance, that, compared with
this, has the simplicity of a&mdash;I don&rsquo;t know
what!</q></p>

<p><q>I like your climaxes,</q> said Jonathan, and
we both laughed. <q>There! I&rsquo;m done. Now
suppose we go, in our simple way, and lock up
the barns and chicken-houses.</q></p>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<p>And so the evenings came and went, each
offering a prospect of fair and quiet things&mdash;books
and firelight and moonlight and talk;
<pb n="078"/><anchor id="Pg078"/>
many in retrospect full of things quite different&mdash;drains
and latches and fledglings and
cows and pigs. Many, but not all. For the
evenings did now and then come when the
pump ceased from troubling and the <q>critters</q>
were at rest. Evenings when we sat
under the lamp and read, when we walked
and walked along moonlit roads or lay on the
slopes of moon-washed meadows. It was on
such an evening that we faced the vagaries of
farm life and searched for a philosophy to
cover them.</p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;m beginning to see that it will never be
any better,</q> I said.</p>

<p><q>Probably not,</q> said Jonathan, talking
around his pipe.</p>

<p><q>You seem contented enough about it.</q></p>

<p><q>I am.</q></p>

<p><q>I don&rsquo;t know that I&rsquo;m contented, but
perhaps I&rsquo;m resigned. I believe it&rsquo;s necessary.</q></p>

<p><q>Of course it&rsquo;s necessary.</q></p>

<p>Jonathan often has the air of having known
since infancy the great truths about life that
I have just discovered. I overlooked this, and
went on, <q>You see, we&rsquo;re right down close to
<pb n="079"/><anchor id="Pg079"/>
the earth that is the ultimate basis of everything,
and all the caprices of things touch us
immediately and we have to make immediate
adjustments to them.</q></p>

<p><q>And that knocks the bottom out of our
evenings.</q></p>

<p><q>Now if we&rsquo;re in the city, playing bridge,
somebody else is making those adjustments
for us. We&rsquo;re like the princess with seventeen
mattresses between her and the pea.</q></p>

<p><q>She felt it, though,</q> said Jonathan. <q>It
kept her awake.</q></p>

<p><q>I know. She had a poor night. But even
she would hardly have maintained that she
felt it as she would have done if the mattresses
hadn&rsquo;t been there.</q></p>

<p><q>True,</q> said Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>Farm life is the pea without the mattresses&mdash;</q>
I went on.</p>

<p><q>Sounds a little cheerless,</q> said Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>Well&mdash;of course, it isn&rsquo;t really cheerless
at all. But neither is it easy. It&rsquo;s full of remorseless
demands for immediate adjustment.</q></p>

<p><q>That was the way the princess felt about
her pea.</q></p>
<pb n="080"/><anchor id="Pg080"/>

<p><q>The princess was a snippy little thing.
But after all, probably her life was full of
adjustments of other sorts. She couldn&rsquo;t call
her soul her own a minute, I suppose.</q></p>

<p><q>Perhaps that was why she ran away,</q>
suggested Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>Of course it was. She ran away to find the
simple life and didn&rsquo;t find it.</q></p>

<p><q>No. She found the pea&mdash;even with all
those mattresses.</q></p>

<p><q>And we&rsquo;ve run away, and found several
peas, and fewer mattresses,</q> said Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>Let&rsquo;s not get confused&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;m not confused,</q> said Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>Well, I shall be in a minute if I don&rsquo;t look
out. You can&rsquo;t follow a parallel too far.
What I mean is, that if you run away from
one kind of complexity you run into another
kind.</q></p>

<p><q>What are you going to do about it?</q></p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;m going to like it all,</q> I answered, <q>and
make believe I meant to do it.</q></p>

<p>After that we were silent awhile. Then I
tried again. <q>You know your trick of waltzing
with a glass of water on your head?</q></p>

<p><q>Yes.</q></p>
<pb n="081"/><anchor id="Pg081"/>

<p><q>Well, I wonder if we couldn&rsquo;t do that
with our souls.</q></p>

<p><q>That suggests to me a rather curious
picture,</q> said Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>Well&mdash;you know what I mean. When
you do that, your body takes up all the jolts
and jiggles before they get to the top of your
head, so the glass stays quiet.</q></p>

<p><q>Well&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>Well, I don&rsquo;t see why&mdash;only, of course,
our souls aren&rsquo;t really anything like glasses
of water, and it would be perfectly detestable
to think of carrying them around carefully
like that.</q></p>

<p><q>Perhaps you&rsquo;d better back out of that
figure of speech,</q> suggested Jonathan. <q>Go
back to your princess. Say, <q>every man his
own mattress.</q></q></p>

<p><q>No. Any figure is wrong. The trouble
with all of them is that as soon as you use
one it begins to get in your way, and say all
sorts of things for you that you never meant
at all. And then if you notice it, it bothers
you, and if you don&rsquo;t notice it, you get drawn
into crooked thinking.</q></p>

<p><q>And yet you can&rsquo;t think without them.</q></p>
<pb n="082"/><anchor id="Pg082"/>

<p><q>No, you can&rsquo;t think without them.</q></p>

<p><q>Well&mdash;where are we, anyway?</q> he
asked placidly.</p>

<p><q>I don&rsquo;t know at all. Only I feel sure that
leading the simple life doesn&rsquo;t depend on the
things you do it <hi rend="font-style: italic">with</hi>.
Feeding your own cows
and pigs and using pumps and candles brings
you no nearer to it than marketing by telephone
and using city water supply and electric
lighting. I don&rsquo;t know what does bring
you nearer, but I&rsquo;m sure it must be something
inside you.</q></p>

<p><q>That sounds rather reasonable,</q> said
Jonathan; <q>almost scriptural&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, I know,</q> I said.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="chapter04">
<pb n="083"/><anchor id="Pg083"/>
<index index="toc" level1="IV. After Frost"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="IV. After Frost"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">IV</head>
<head type="sub">After Frost</head>

<p>It is late afternoon in mid-September. I
stand in my garden sniffing the raw air, and
wondering, as always at this season,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">will</hi>
there be frost to-night or will there not? Of
course if I were a woodchuck or a muskrat, or
any other really intelligent creature, I should
know at once and act accordingly, but being
only a stupid human being, I am thrown
back on conjecture, assisted by the thermometer,
and an appeal to Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>Too much wind for frost,</q> says he.</p>

<p><q>Sure? I&rsquo;d hate to lose my nasturtiums
quite so early.</q></p>

<p><q>You won&rsquo;t lose &rsquo;em. Look at the thermometer
if you don&rsquo;t believe me. If it&rsquo;s
above forty you&rsquo;re safe.</q></p>

<p>I look, and try to feel reassured. But I am
not quite easy in my mind until next morning
when, running out before breakfast, I make
the rounds and find everything untouched.</p>
<pb n="084"/><anchor id="Pg084"/>

<p>But a few days later the alarm comes again.
There is no wind this time, and, what is
worse, an ominous silence falls at dusk over
the orchard and meadow. <q>Why is everything
so still?</q> I ask myself. <q>Oh, of course&mdash;the
katydids aren&rsquo;t talking&mdash;and the
crickets, and all the other whirr-y things.
Ah! That means business! My poor garden!</q></p>

<p><q>Jonathan!</q> I call, as I feel rather than
see his shape whirling noiselessly in at the
big gate after his ride up from the station.
<q>Help me cover my nasturtiums. There&rsquo;ll
be frost to-night.</q></p>

<p><q>Maybe,</q> says Jonathan&rsquo;s voice.</p>

<p><q>Not maybe at all&mdash;surely. Listen to the
katydids!</q></p>

<p><q>You mean, listen to the absence of katydids.</q></p>

<p><q>Very well. The point is, I want newspapers.</q></p>

<p><q>No. The point is, I am to bring newspapers.</q></p>

<p><q>Exactly.</q></p>

<p><q>And tuck up your nasturtiums for the
night in your peculiarly ridiculous fashion&mdash;</q></p>
<pb n="085"/><anchor id="Pg085"/>

<p><q>I know it looks ridiculous, but really it&rsquo;s
sensible. There may be weeks of summer
after this.</q></p>

<p>And so the nasturtiums are tucked up,
cozily hidden under the big layers of sheets,
whose corners we fasten down with stones.
To be sure, the garden <hi rend="font-style: italic">is</hi> rather a funny
sight, with these pale shapes sprawling over
its beds. But it pays. For in the morning,
though over in the vegetable garden the
squash leaves and lima beans are blackened
and limp, my nasturtiums are still pert and
crisp. I pull off the papers, wondering what
the passers-by have thought, and lo! my gay
garden, good for perhaps two weeks more!</p>

<p>But a day arrives when even newspaper
coddling is of no avail. Sometimes it is in late
September, sometimes not until October, but
when it comes there is no resisting.</p>

<p>The sun goes down, leaving a clear sky
paling to green at the horizon. A still cold
falls upon the world, and I feel that it is
the end. Shears in hand, I cut everything I
can&mdash;nasturtiums down to the ground,&mdash;leaves,
buds, and all,&mdash;feathery sprays of
cosmos, asters by the armful. Those last
<pb n="086"/><anchor id="Pg086"/>
bouquets that I bring into the house are always
the most beautiful, for I do not have to
save buds for later cutting. There will, alas,
be no later cutting.</p>

<p>So I fill my bowls and vases, and next
morning I go out, well knowing what I shall
see. It is a beautiful sight, too, if one can
forget its meaning. The whole golden-green
world of autumn has been touched with silver.
In the low-lying swamp beyond the
orchard it is almost like a light snowfall.
The meadows rising beyond the barns are
silvered over wherever the long tree-shadows
still lie. And in my garden, too, where the
shadows linger, every leaf is frosted, but as
soon as the sun warms them through, leaf and
twig turn dark and droop to the ground. It is
the end.</p>

<p>Except, indeed, for my brave marigolds
and calendulas and little button asters. It is
for this reason that I have given them space
all summer, nipping them back when they
tried to blossom early, for they seem a bit
crude compared with the other flowers. But
now that frost is here, my feelings warm to
them. I cannot criticize their color and texture,
<pb n="087"/><anchor id="Pg087"/>
so grateful am I to them for not giving
up. And when last night&rsquo;s cuttings have
faded, I shall be very glad of a glowing mass
of marigold beside my fireplace, and of the
yellow stars of calendula, like embodied
sunshine, on my dining-table.</p>

<p>Well, then, the frost has come! And after
the first pang of realization, I find that, curiously
enough, the worst is over. Since it has
come, let it come! And now&mdash;hurrah for the
garden house-cleaning! The garden is dead&mdash;the
garden of yesterday! Long live the
garden&mdash;the garden of to-morrow! For
suddenly my mind has leaped ahead to spring.</p>

<p>I can hardly wait for breakfast to be over,
before I am out in working clothes, pulling
up things&mdash;not weeds now, but flowers, or
what were flowers. Nasturtiums, asters, cosmos,
snapdragon, stock, late-blooming cornflowers&mdash;up
they all come, all the annuals,
and the biennials that have had their season.
I fling them together in piles, and soon have
small haystacks all along my grass paths, and&mdash;there
I am! Down again to the good brown
earth!</p>

<p>It is with positive satisfaction that I stand
<pb n="088"/><anchor id="Pg088"/>
and survey my beds, great bare patches of
earth, glorified here and there by low clumps
of calendula and great bushes of marigold.
Now, then! I can do anything! I can dig,
and fertilize, and transplant. Best of all, I
can plan and plan! The crisp wind stings my
cheeks, but as I work I feel the sun hot on the
back of my neck. I get the smell of the earth
as I turn it over, mingled with the pungent
tang of marigold blossoms, very pleasant out
of doors, though almost too strong for the
house except near a fireplace. I believe the
most characteristic fall odors are to me this
of marigold, mingled with the fragrance of
apples piled in the orchard, the good smell
of earth newly turned up, and the flavor of
burning leaves, borne now and then on the
wind, from the outdoor house-cleaning of the
world.</p>

<p>There is perhaps no season of all the garden
year that brings more real delight to the
gardener, no time so stimulating to the imagination.
This year in the garden has been
good, but next year shall be better. All the
failures, or near-failures, shall of course be
turned into successes, and the successes shall
<pb n="089"/><anchor id="Pg089"/>
be bettered. Last year there were not quite
enough hollyhocks, but next year there shall
be such glories! There are seedlings that I
have been saving, over on the edge of the
phlox. I dash across to look them up&mdash;yes,
here they are, splendid little fellows, leaves
only a bit crumpled by the frost. I dig them
up carefully, keeping earth packed about
their roots, and one by one I convey them
across and set them out in a beautiful row
where I want them to grow next year. Their
place is beside the old stone-flagged path, and
I picture them rising tall against the side of
the woodshed, whose barrenness I have besides
more than half covered with honeysuckle.</p>

<p>Then, there are my foxgloves. Some of
them I have already transplanted, but not
all. There is a little corner full of stocky
yearlings that I must change now. And that
same corner can be used for poppies. I have
kept seeds of this year&rsquo;s poppies&mdash;funny
little brown pepper-shakers, with tiny holes
at the end through which I shake out the fine
seed dust. Doubtless they would attend to
all this without my help, but I like to be sure
<pb n="090"/><anchor id="Pg090"/>
that even my self-seeding annuals come up
where I most want them.</p>

<p>Biennials, like the foxglove and canterbury
bells, are of course, the difficult children
of the garden, because you have to plan
not only for next year but for the year after.
Next year&rsquo;s bloom is secured&mdash;unless they
winter-kill&mdash;in this year&rsquo;s young plants,
growing since spring, or even since the fall
before. These I transplant for next summer&rsquo;s
beauty. But for the year after I like to take
double precautions. Already I have tiny
seedlings, started since August, but besides
these I sow seed, too late to start before
spring. For a severe winter may do havoc,
and I shall then need the early start given by
fall sowing.</p>

<p>As I work on, I discover all sorts of treasures&mdash;young
plants, seedlings from all the
big-folk of my garden. Young larkspurs
surround the bushy parent clumps, and
the ground near the forget-me-nots is fairly
carpeted with little new ones. I have found
that, though the old forget-me-nots will live
through, it pays to pull out the most ragged
of them and trust to the youngsters to fill
<pb n="091"/><anchor id="Pg091"/>
their places. These, and English daisies, I let
grow together about as they will. They are
pretty together, with their mingling of pink,
white, and blue, they never run out, and all I
need is to keep them from spreading too far,
or from crowding each other too much.</p>

<p>When my back aches from this kind of
sorting and shifting, I straighten up and look
about me again. Ah! The phlox! Time now
to attend to that!</p>

<p>My white phlox is really the most distinguished
thing in my garden. I have pink
and lavender, too, but any one can have pink
and lavender by ordering them from a florist.
They can have white, too, but not my
white. For mine never saw a florist; it is an
inheritance.</p>

<p>Sixty or seventy years ago there was a
beautiful little garden north of the old house
tended and loved by a beautiful lady. The
lady died, and the garden did not long outlive
her. Its place was taken by a crab-apple
orchard, which flourished, bore blossom and
fruit, until in its turn it grew old, while the
garden had faded to a dim tradition. But one
day in August, a few years ago, I discovered
<pb n="092"/><anchor id="Pg092"/>
under the shade of an old crab tree, two slender
sprays of white phlox, trying to blossom.
In memory of that old garden and its lady, I
took them up and cherished them. And the
miracle of life was again made manifest.
For from those two little half-starved roots
has come the most splendid part of my garden.
All summer it makes a thick green wall
on the garden&rsquo;s edge, beside the flagged path.
In the other beds it rises in luxuriant masses,
giving background and body with its wonderful
deep green foliage, which is greener
and thicker than any other phlox I know.
And when its season to bloom arrives&mdash;a
long month, from early August to mid-September&mdash;it
is a glory of whiteness, the tallest
sprays on a level with my eyes, the shortest
shoulder high, except when rain weighs down
the heavy heads and they lean across the
paths barring my passage with their fragrant
wetness.</p>

<p>Here and there I have let the pink and
lavender phlox come in, for they begin to
bloom two weeks earlier, when the garden
needs color. But always my white must
dominate. And it does. Most wonderful of
<pb n="093"/><anchor id="Pg093"/>
all is it on moonlight nights of late August,
when it broods over the garden like a white
cloud, and the night moths come crowding
to its fragrant feast, with their intermittent
burring of furry wings.</p>

<p>Ah, well! the phlox has passed now, and its
trim green leaves are brown and crackly. I
can do what I like with it after this. So when
my other transplanting grows tiresome, I fall
upon my phlox. Every year some of it needs
thinning, so quickly does it spread. I take the
spading-fork, and, with what seems like utter
ruthlessness, I pry out from the thickest centers
enough good roots to give the rest breathing
and growing space. Along the path edges
I always have to cut out encroaching roots
each year, or else soon there would be no
path. But all that I take out is precious,
either to give to friends for their gardens, or
to enlarge the edges of my own. For this
phlox needs almost no care, and will fight
grass and weeds for itself.</p>

<p>There are phlox seedlings, too, all over the
garden, but I have no way of telling what color
they are, though usually I can detect the
white by its foliage. I take them up and set
<pb n="094"/><anchor id="Pg094"/>
them out near the main phlox masses, and
wait for the next season&rsquo;s blossoming before I
give them their final place.</p>

<p>This is the time of year, too, when I give
some attention to the rocks in my garden.
Of course, in order to have a garden at all,
it was necessary to take out enough rock
to build quite a respectable stone wall. But
that was not the end. There never will be an
end. A Connecticut garden grows rocks like
weeds, and one must expect to keep on taking
them out each fall. The rest of the year I try
to ignore them, but after frost I like to make
a fresh raid, and get rid of another wheelbarrow
load or so. And I always notice that
for one barrow load of stones that go out, it
takes at least two barrow loads of earth to
fill in. Thus an excellent circulation is maintained,
and the garden does not stagnate.
Moreover, I take great pleasure in showing
my friends&mdash;especially friends from the
more earthy sections of New York and farther
west&mdash;the piles of rock and the parts of
certain stone walls about the place that have
been literally made out of the cullings of my
garden. They never believe me.</p>
<pb n="095"/><anchor id="Pg095"/>

<p>As I am thus occupied,&mdash;digging, planting,
thinning, sowing,&mdash;I find it one of the
happiest seasons of the year. It is partly the
stimulus of the autumn air, partly the pleasure
of getting at the ground. I think there
are some of us, city folk though we be, who
must have the giant AntÃ¦us for ancestor. We
still need to get in close touch with the earth
now and then. Children have a true instinct
with their love of barefoot play in the dirt,
and there are grown folks who still love it&mdash;but
we call it gardening. The sight and the
feel and the smell of my brown garden beds
gives me a pleasure that is very deep and
probably very primitive.</p>

<p>But there is another source of pleasure in
my fall gardening&mdash;a pleasure not of the
senses but of the imagination.</p>

<p>For as I do my work my fancy is active.
As I transplant my young hollyhocks, I see
them, not little round-leaved bunches in my
hand, but tall and stately, aflare with colors&mdash;yellows,
whites, pinks. As I dig about my
larkspur and stake out its seedlings, they
spire above me in heavenly blues. As I arrange
the clumps of coarse-leaved young
<pb n="096"/><anchor id="Pg096"/>
foxgloves, I seem to see their rich tower-like
clusters of old-pink bells bending always a
little towards the southeast, where most sun
comes from. As I thin my forget-me-not I
see it&mdash;in my mind&rsquo;s eye&mdash;in a blue mist
of spring bloom. Thus, a garden rises in my
fancy, a garden where neither beetle, borer,
nor cutworm doth corrupt, and where the
mole doth not break in or steal, where gentle
rain and blessed sun come as they are needed,
where all the flowers bloom unceasingly in
colors of heavenly light&mdash;a garden such as
never yet existed nor ever shall, till the tales
of fairyland come true. I shall never see that
garden, yet every year it blooms for me
afresh&mdash;after frost.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="chapter05">
<pb n="097"/><anchor id="Pg097"/>
<index index="toc" level1="V. The Joys of Garden Stewardship"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="V. The Joys of Garden Stewardship"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">V</head>
<head type="sub">The Joys of Garden Stewardship</head>

<p>I sometimes think I am coming to classify
my friends according to the way they act
when I talk about my garden. On this basis,
there are three sorts of people.</p>

<p>First there are those who are obviously not
interested. Such as these feel no answering
thrill, even at the sight of a florist&rsquo;s spring
catalogue. A weed inspires in them no desire
to pull it. They may, however, be really nice
people if they are still young; for, except by
special grace, no one under thirty need be
expected to care about gardens&mdash;it is a mature
taste. But in the mean time I turn our
talk in other channels.</p>

<p>Then there are the people who, when I
approach the subject, brighten up, look intelligent,
even eager, but in a moment make
it clear that what they are eager for is a
chance to talk about their own gardens.
Mine is merely the stepping-stone, the bridge,
<pb n="098"/><anchor id="Pg098"/>
the handle. This is better than indifference,
yet it is sometimes trying. One of my dearest
friends thus tests my love now and then when
she walks in my garden.</p>

<p><q>Aren&rsquo;t those peonies lovely?</q> I suggest.</p>

<p><q>Yes,</q> dreamily; <q>you know I can&rsquo;t have
that shade in my garden because&mdash;</q> and she
trails off into a disquisition that I could, just
at that moment, do without.</p>

<p><q>Look at the height of that larkspur!</q> I say.</p>

<p><q>Yes&mdash;but, you know, it wouldn&rsquo;t do for
me to have larkspur when I go away so early.
What I need is things for April and May.</q></p>

<p><q>Well, I am not trying to
<hi rend="font-style: italic">sell</hi> you any,</q> I
am sometimes goaded into protesting. <q>I
only wanted you to say they are pretty&mdash;pretty
right here in <hi rend="font-style: italic">my</hi> garden.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes&mdash;yes&mdash;of course they are pretty&mdash;they&rsquo;re
lovely&mdash;you have a lovely garden,
you know.</q> She pulls herself up to give
this tribute, but soon her eyes get the faraway
look in them again, and she is murmuring,
<q>Oh, I must write Edward to see
about that hedge. Tell me, my dear, if you
had a brick wall, would you have vines on it
or wall-fruit?</q></p>
<pb n="099"/><anchor id="Pg099"/>

<p>It is of no use. I cannot hold her long. I
sometimes think she was nicer when she had
no garden of her own. Perhaps she thinks I
was nicer when I had none.</p>

<p>But there is another kind of garden manners&mdash;a
kind that subtly soothes, cheers,
perhaps inebriates. It is the manner of the
friend who may, indeed, have a garden, but
who looks at mine with the eye of adoption,
temporarily at least. She walks down its
paths, singling out this or that for notice.
She suggests, she even criticizes, tenderly, as
one who tells you an <q>even
<hi rend="font-style: italic">more</hi> becoming
way</q> to arrange your little daughter&rsquo;s hair.
She offers you roots and seeds and seedlings
from her garden, and&mdash;last touch of flattery&mdash;she
begs seeds and seedlings from yours.</p>

<p>For garden purposes, give me the manners
of this third class. And, indeed, not for
garden purposes alone. They are useful as
applied to many things&mdash;children, particularly,
and houses.</p>

<p>Undoubtedly the demand that I make
upon my friends is a form of vanity, yet I
cannot seem to feel ashamed of it. I admit at
once that not the least part of my pleasure in
<pb n="100"/><anchor id="Pg100"/>
my flowers is the attention they get from
others. Moreover, it is not only from friends
that I seek this, but from every passer-by
along my country road. There are gardens
and gardens. Some, set about with hedges
tall and thick, offer the delights of exclusiveness
and solitude. But exclusiveness and solitude
are easily had on a Connecticut farm,
and my garden will none of them; it flings
forth its appeal to every wayfarer. And I
like it. I like my garden to <q>get notice.</q> As
people drive by I hope they enjoy my phlox.
I furtively glance to see if they have an eye
for the foxglove. I wonder if the calendulas
are so tall that they hide the asters. And if,
as I bend over my weeding, an automobile
whirling past lets fly an appreciative phrase&mdash;<q>lovely
flowers&mdash;</q> <q>wonderful yellow
of&mdash;</q> <q>garden there,</q>&mdash;my ears are quick
to receive it and I forgive the eddies of gasolene
and dust that are also left by the vanishing
visitant.</p>

<p>About few things can one be so brazen in
one&rsquo;s enjoyment of recognition. One&rsquo;s house,
one&rsquo;s clothes, one&rsquo;s work, one&rsquo;s children, all
these demand a certain modesty of demeanor,
<pb n="101"/><anchor id="Pg101"/>
however the inner spirit may puff.
Not so one&rsquo;s garden. I fancy this is because,
while I have a strong sense of ownership in it,
I also have a strong sense of stewardship.
As owner I must be modest, but as steward I
may admire as openly as I will. Did I make
my phlox? Did I fashion my asters? Am I the
artificer of my fringed larkspur? Nay, truly,
I am but their caretaker, and may glory in
them as well as another, only with the added
touch of joy that I, even I, have given them
their opportunity. Like Paul I plant, like
Apollos I water, but before the power that
giveth the increase I stand back and wonder.</p>

<p>But it is not alone the results of my stewardship
that give me joy. Its very processes
are good. Delight in the earth is a primitive
instinct. Digging is naturally pleasant, hoeing
is pleasant, raking is pleasant, and then
there is the weeding. For I am not the only
one who sows seeds in my garden. One of my
friends remarked cheerfully that he had
planted twenty-seven different vegetables in
his garden, and the Lord had planted two
hundred and twenty-seven other kinds of
things.</p>
<pb n="102"/><anchor id="Pg102"/>

<p>This is where the weeding comes in. Now a
good deal has been said about the labor of
weeding, but little about the gratifications of
weeding. I don&rsquo;t mean weeding with a hoe.
I mean yanking up, with movements suited
to the occasion, each individual growing
thing that doesn&rsquo;t belong. Surely I am not
the only one to have felt the pleasure of this.
They come up so nicely, and leave such soft
earth behind! And intellect is needed, too,
for each weed demands its own way of handling:
the adherent plantain needing a slow,
firm, drawing motion, but very satisfactory
when it comes; the evasive clover requiring
that all its sprawling runners shall be gathered
up in one gentle, tactful pull; the tender
shepherd&rsquo;s purse coming easily on a straight
twitch; the tough ragweed that yields to almost
any kind of jerk. Even witch-grass, the
bane of the farmer, has its rewarding side,
when one really does get out its handful of
wicked-looking, crawly, white tubers.</p>

<p>Weeding is most fun when the weeds are
not too small. Yes, from the aspect of a sport
there is something to be said for letting weeds
grow. Pulling out little tender ones is poor
<pb n="103"/><anchor id="Pg103"/>
work compared with the satisfaction of hauling
up a spreading treelet of ragweed or a
far-flaunting wild buckwheat. You seem to
get so much for your effort, and it stirs up
the ground so, and no other weeds have grown
under the shade of the big one, so its departure
leaves a good bit of empty brown
earth.</p>

<p>Surely, weeding is good fun. If faults could
be yanked out of children in the same entertaining
way, the orphan asylums would soon
be emptied through the craze for adoption as
a major sport.</p>

<p>One of the pleasantest mornings of my life
was spent weeding, in the rain, a long-neglected
corner of my garden, while a young
friend stood around the edges and explained
the current political situation to me, and
carted away armfuls of green stuff as I
handed them out to him. The rain drizzled,
and the air was fragrant with the smell of
wet earth and bruised stems. Ideally, of
course, weeds should never reach this state
of sportive rankness. But most of my friends
admit, under pressure, that there are corners
where such things do happen.</p>
<pb n="104"/><anchor id="Pg104"/>

<p>Naturally, all this is assuming that one is
one&rsquo;s own gardener. There may be pleasure
in having a garden kept up by a real gardener,
but that always seems to me a little
like having a doll and letting somebody else
dress and undress it. My garden must never
grow so big that I cannot take care of it&mdash;and
neglect it&mdash;myself.</p>

<p>In saying this, however, I don&rsquo;t count
rocks. When it comes to rocks, I call in Jonathan.
And it often comes to rocks.</p>

<p>For mine is a Connecticut garden. Now
in the beginning Connecticut was composed
entirely of rocks. Then the little earth
gnomes, fearing that no one would ever come
there to give them sport, sprinkled a little
earth amongst the rocks, partly covered
some, wholly covered others, and then hid to
see what the gardeners would do about it.
And ever since the gardeners have been patiently,
or impatiently, tucking in their seeds
and plants in the thimblefuls of earth left by
the gnomes. They have been picking out the
rocks, or blowing them up, or burying them,
or working around them; and every winter
the little gnomes gather and push up a new
<pb n="105"/><anchor id="Pg105"/>
lot from the dark storehouses of the underworld.
In the spring the gardeners begin
again, and the little gnomes hold their sides
with still laughter to watch the work go on.</p>

<p><q>Rocks?</q> my friends say. <q>Do you mind
the rocks? But they are a special beauty!
Why, I have a rock in my garden that I have
treated&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>Very well,</q> I interrupt rudely.
<q><hi rend="font-style: italic">A rock</hi> is
all very well. If I had <hi rend="font-style: italic">a
rock</hi> in my garden I
could treat it, too. But how about a garden
that is all rocks?</q></p>

<p><q>Oh&mdash;why&mdash;choose another spot.</q></p>

<p>Whereupon I reply, <q>You don&rsquo;t know
Connecticut.</q></p>

<p>Ever since I began having a garden I have
had my troubles with the rocks, but the
worst time came when, in a mood of enthusiastic
and absolutely unintelligent optimism,
I decided to have a bit of smooth grass in the
middle of my garden. I wanted it very much.
The place was too restless; you couldn&rsquo;t sit
down anywhere. I felt that I had to have a
clear green spot where I could take a chair
and a book. I selected the spot, marked it off
with string, and began to loosen up the earth
<pb n="106"/><anchor id="Pg106"/>
for a late summer planting of grass seed.
Calendulas and poppies and cornflowers had
bloomed there before, self-sown and able to
look out for themselves, so I had never investigated
the depths of the bed to see what
the little gnomes had prepared for me. Now
I found out. The spading-fork gave a familiar
dull clink as it struck rock. I felt about
for the edge; it was a big one. I got the crowbar
and dropped it, in testing prods; it was a
<hi rend="font-style: italic">very</hi>
big one, and only four inches below the
surface. Grass would never grow there in a
dry season. I moved to another part. Another
rock, big too! I prodded all over the
allotted space, and found six big fellows lurking
just below the top of the soil. Evidently
it was a case for calling in Jonathan.</p>

<p>He came, grumbling a little, as a man
should, but very efficient, armed with two
crowbars and equipped with a natural genius
for manipulating rocks. He made a few
well-placed remarks about queer people who
choose to have grass where flowers would
grow, and flowers where grass would grow,
also about Connecticut being intended for a
quarry and not for a garden anyhow. But all
<pb n="107"/><anchor id="Pg107"/>
this was only the necessary accompaniment of
the crowbar-play. Soon, under the insistent
and canny urgency of the bars, a big rock
began to heave its shoulder into sight above
the soil. I hovered about, chucking in stones
and earth underneath, placing little rocks
under the bar for fulcrums, pulling them out
again when they were no longer needed,
standing guard over the flowers in the rest of
the garden, with repeated warnings. <q>Please,
Jonathan, don&rsquo;t step back any farther; you&rsquo;ll
trample the forget-me-nots!</q>
<q><hi rend="font-style: italic">Could</hi> you
manage to roll this fellow out along that
path and not across the mangled bodies of
the marigolds?</q> Jonathan grumbled a little
about being expected to pick a half-ton pebble
out of the garden with his fingers, or lead
it out with a string.</p>

<p><q>Oh, well, of course, if you
<hi rend="font-style: italic">can&rsquo;t</hi> do it I&rsquo;ll
have to let the marigolds go this year. But
you do such wonderful things with a crowbar,
I thought you could probably just guide it a
little.</q> And Jonathan responds nobly to the
flattery of this remark, and does indeed guide
the huge thing, eases it along the narrow
path, grazes the marigolds but leaves them
<pb n="108"/><anchor id="Pg108"/>
unhurt, until at last, with a careful arrangement
of stone fulcrums and a skillful twist of
the bars, the great rock makes its last response
and lunges heavily past the last flower
bed on to the grass beyond.</p>

<p>When the work was done, the edge of the
garden looked like Stonehenge, and the spot
where my grass was to be was nothing but
a yawning pit, crying to be filled. We surveyed
it with interest. <q>If we had a water-supply,
I wouldn&rsquo;t make a grass-plot,</q> I
said; <q>I&rsquo;d make a swimming-pool. It&rsquo;s deep
enough.</q></p>

<p><q>And sit in the middle with your book?</q>
asked Jonathan.</p>

<p>But there was no water-supply, so we filled
it in with earth. Thirty wheelbarrow loads
went in where those rocks came out. And
the little gnomes perched on Stonehenge and
jeered the while. I photographed it, and the
rocks <q>took</q> well, but as regards the gnomes,
the film was underexposed.</p>

<p>Thus the grass seed was planted. And we
reminded each other of the version of <q>America</q>
once given, with unconscious inspiration,
by a little friend of ours:&mdash;</p>
<pb n="109"/><anchor id="Pg109"/>

<quote rend="display">
  <l><q rend="post: none">Land where our father died,</q></l>
  <l><q rend="pre: none">Land where the pilgrims pried.</q></l>
</quote>

<p>It seemed to us to suit the adventure.</p>

<p>As I have said, I love to have my friends
love my garden. But there is one thing about
it that I find does not always appeal to them
pleasantly, and that is its color-schemes.
Yet this is not my doing. For in nothing do
I feel more keenly the fact of my mere stewardship
than in this matter of color-scheme.</p>

<p>I set out with a very rigid one. I was
quite decided in my own mind that what
I wanted was white and salmon-pink and
lavender. Asters, phlox, sweet peas, hollyhocks,
all were to bend themselves to my
rules. At first affairs went very well. White
was easy. White phlox I had, and have&mdash;an
inheritance&mdash;which from a few roots is
spreading and spreading in waves of whiteness
that grow more luxuriant every year.
But I bought roots of salmon-pink and lavender,
and then my troubles commenced.
About the third season strange things began
to happen. The pink phlox had the strength
of ten. It spread amazingly; but it forgot all
about my rules. It degenerated, some of it&mdash;reverted
<pb n="110"/><anchor id="Pg110"/>
toward that magenta shade that
nature seems so naturally to adore in the
vegetable world. To my horror I found my
garden blossoming into magenta pink, blue
pink, crimson, cardinal&mdash;all the colors I had
determined not under any circumstances to
admit. On the other hand, the lavender
phlox, which I particularly wanted, was
most lovely, but frail. It refused to spread.
It effaced itself before the rampant pink and
its magenta-tainted brood. I vowed I would
pull out the magentas, but each year my
courage failed. They bloomed so bravely; I
would wait till they were through. But by
that time I was not quite sure which was
which; I might pull out the wrong ones. And
so I hesitated.</p>

<p>Moreover, I discovered, lingering among
the flowers at dusk, that there were certain
colors, most unpleasant by daylight, which
at that time took on a new shade, and, for
perhaps half an hour before night fell, were
richly lovely. This is true of some of the
magentas, which at dusk turn suddenly to
royal purples and deep lavender-blues that
are wonderfully satisfying.</p>
<pb n="111"/><anchor id="Pg111"/>

<p>For that half-hour of beauty I spare them.
While the sun shines I try to look the other
way, and at twilight I linger near them and
enjoy their strange, dim glories, born literally
of the magic hour. But I have trouble explaining
them, by daylight, to some of my
visitors who like color-schemes.</p>

<p>Insubordination is contagious. And I
found after a while that my asters were not
running true; queer things were happening
among the sweet peas, and in the ranks of the
hollyhocks all was not as it should be. And
the last charge was made upon me by the
children&rsquo;s gardens. Children know not color-schemes.
What they demand is flowers, flowers&mdash;flowers
to pick and pick, flowers to do
things with. Snapdragon, for instance, is a
jolly playmate, and little fingers love to
pinch its cheeks and see its jaws yawn wide.
But snapdragon tends dangerously toward
the magenta. Then there was the calendula&mdash;a
delight to the young, because it blooms
incessantly long past the early frosts, and has
brittle stems that yield themselves to the
clumsiest plucking by small hands. But calendula
ranges from a faded yellow, through
<pb n="112"/><anchor id="Pg112"/>
really pretty primrose shades, to a deep red-orange
touched with maroon.</p>

<p>And, finally, there was the portulaca.
Children love it, perhaps, best of all. It offers
them fresh blossoms and new colors each
morning, and it is even more easy to pick
than the calendula. Who would deny them
portulaca? Yet if this be admitted, one may
as well give up the battle. For, as we all
know, there is absolutely no color, except
green, that portulaca does not perpetrate in
its blossoms. It knows no shame.</p>

<p>In short, I am giving up. I am beginning
to say with conviction that color-schemes are
the mark of a narrow and rigid taste&mdash;that
they are born of convention and are meant
not for living things but for wall-papers and
portiÃ¨res and clothes. Moreover, I am really
growing callous&mdash;or is it, rather, broad?
Colors in my garden that would once have
made my teeth ache now leave them feeling
perfectly comfortable. I find myself looking
with unmoved flesh&mdash;no creeps nor withdrawals&mdash;upon
a bed of mixed magentas,
scarlets, rose-pinks, and yellow-pinks. I even
look with pleasure. I begin to think there
<pb n="113"/><anchor id="Pg113"/>
may be a point beyond which discord achieves
a higher harmony. At least, this sounds well.
But, again, I find it hard to explain to some
of my friends.</p>

<p>Indoors, it is another story. When I bring
in the spoils of the garden I am again mistress
and bend all to my will. Here I&rsquo;ll have
no tricks of color played on me. Sunshine and
sky, perhaps, work some spell, for as soon as I
get within four walls my prejudices return;
scarlets and crimsons and pinks have to live
in different rooms. I must have my color-schemes
again, and perhaps I am as narrow
as the worst. Except, indeed, for the children&rsquo;s
bowls; here the pink and the magenta,
the lamb and the lion, may lie down together.
But it takes a little child to lead them.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<p>Out in my garden I feel myself less and
less owner, more and more merely steward.
I decree certain paths, and the phlox says,
<q>Paths? Did you say paths?</q> and obliterates
them in a season&rsquo;s growth, so that children
walk by faith and not by sight. I decree
iris in one corner, and the primroses say,
<q>Iris? Not at all. This is our bed. Iris indeed!</q>
<pb n="114"/><anchor id="Pg114"/>
And I submit, and move the iris
elsewhere.</p>

<p>And yet this slipping of responsibility is
pleasant, too. So long as my garden will let
me dig in it and weed it and pick it, so long as
it entertains my friends for me, so long as it
tosses up an occasional rock so that Jonathan
does not lose all interest in it, so long as it
plays prettily with the children and flings gay
greetings to every passer-by, I can find no
fault with it.</p>

<p>The joys of stewardship are great and I
am well content.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="chapter06">
<pb n="115"/><anchor id="Pg115"/>
<index index="toc" level1="VI. Trout and Arbutus"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="VI. Trout and Arbutus"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">VI</head>
<head type="sub">Trout and Arbutus</head>

<p>Every year, toward the end of March, I find
Jonathan poking about in my sewing-box.
And, unless I am very absent-minded, I know
what he is after.</p>

<p><q>No use looking there,</q> I remark; <q>I keep
my silks put away.</q></p>

<p><q>I want red, and as strong as there is.</q></p>

<p><q>I know what you want. Here.</q> and I
hand him a spool of red buttonhole twist.</p>

<p><q>Ah! Just right!</q> And for the rest of the
evening his fingers are busy.</p>

<p>Over what? Mending our trout-rods, of
course. It is pretty work, calling for strength
and precision of grasp, and as he winds and
winds, adjusting all the little brass leading-rings,
or supplying new ones, and staying
points in the bamboo where he suspects weakness,
we talk over last year&rsquo;s trout-pools, and
wonder what they will be like this year.</p>

<p>But beyond wonder we do not get, often
for weeks after the trout season is, legislatively,
<pb n="116"/><anchor id="Pg116"/>
<q>open.</q> Jonathan is <q>busy.</q> I am
<q>busy.</q> We know that, if April passes, there
is still May and June, and so, if at the end of
April, or early May, we do at last pick up
our rods,&mdash;all new-bedight with red silk
windings, and shiny with fresh varnish,&mdash;it
is not alone the call of the trout that decides
us, but another call which is to me at least
more imperious, because, if we neglect it now,
there is no May and June in which to heed it.
It is the call of the arbutus.</p>

<p>Any one with New England traditions
knows what this call is. Its appeal is to
something far deeper than the love of a pretty
flower. For it is the flower that, to our fathers
and our grandfathers, and to their fathers and
grandfathers, meant spring; and not spring in
its prettiness and ease, appealing to the idler
in us, nor spring in its melancholy, appealing
to&mdash;shall I say the poet in us? But spring
in its blessedness of opportunity, its joyously
triumphant life, appealing to the worker in
us. Here, of course, we touch hands with all
the races of the world for whom winter has
been the supreme menace, spring the supreme
and saving miracle. But each race has its own
<pb n="117"/><anchor id="Pg117"/>
symbols, and to the New Englander the symbol
is the arbutus.</p>

<p>This may seem a bit of sentimentality.
And, indeed, we need not expect to find it
expressed by any New England farmer. New
England does not go out in gay companies to
bring back the first blossoms. But New
England does nothing in gay companies. It
has been taught to distrust ceremonies and
expression of any sort. It rejoices with reticence,
it appreciates with a reservation. And
yet I have seen a sprig of arbutus in rough
and clumsy buttonholes on weather-faded
lapels which, the rest of the twelve-month
through, know no other flower. And when,
in unfamiliar country, I have interrupted the
ploughing to ask for guidance, I usually get
it:&mdash;<q>Arbutus? Yaas. The&rsquo;s a lot of it up
along that hillside and in the woods over beyond&mdash;&rsquo;t
was out last week, some of it, I
happened to notice</q>&mdash;this in the apologetic
tone of one who admits a weakness&mdash;<q>guess
you&rsquo;ll find all you want.</q> I venture to say
that of no other wild flower, except those
which work specific harm or good, could I get
such information.</p>
<pb n="118"/><anchor id="Pg118"/>

<p>To many of us, city-bred, the tradition
comes through inheritance. It means, perhaps,
the shy, poetic side of our father&rsquo;s boyhood,
only half acknowledged, after the New
England fashion, but none the less real and
none the less our possession. It means rare
days, when the city&mdash;whose chiefest signs
of spring were the flare of dandelions in yards
and parks and the chatter of English sparrows
on ivy-clad church walls&mdash;was left behind,
and we were <q>in the country.</q> It was a
country excitingly different from the country
of the summer vacation, a country not deeply
green, but warmly brown, and sweet with the
smell of moist, living earth. Green enough,
indeed, in the spring-fed meadows and folds of
the hills, where the early grass flashes into
vividest emerald, but in the woods the soft
mist-colored mazes of multitudinous twigs
still show through their veilings and dustings
of color&mdash;palest green of birches, gray-green
of poplar, yellow-green of willows, and
redder tones of the maples; and along the
fence-lines and roadsides&mdash;blessed, untidy
fence-lines and roadsides of New England&mdash;a
fine penciling of red stems&mdash;the cut-back
<pb n="119"/><anchor id="Pg119"/>
maple bushes and tangled vines alive to their
tips and just bursting into leaf. And everywhere
in the woods, on fence-lines and roadsides,
the white blossoms of the <q>shad-blow,</q>
daintiest of spring trees,&mdash;too slight for a
tree, indeed, though too tall for a bush and
looking less like a tree in blossom than like
floating blossoms caught for a moment among
the twigs. A moment only, for the first gust
loosens them again and carpets the woods
with their petals, but while they last their
whiteness shimmers everywhere.</p>

<p>Such rare days were all blown through
with the wonderful wind of spring. Spring
wind is really different from any other. It is
not a finished thing, like the mellow winds of
summer and the cold blasts of winter. It is an
imperfect blend of shivering reminiscence and
eager promise. One moment it breathes sun
and stirring earth, the next it reminds us of
old snow in the hollows, and bleak northern
slopes.</p>

<p>When, on these days, the wind blew to us,
almost before we saw it, the first greeting of
the arbutus, it always seemed that the day
had found its complete and satisfying expression.
<pb n="120"/><anchor id="Pg120"/>
Every one comes to realize, at
some time in his life, the power of suggestion
possessed by odors. Does not half the power
of the Church lie in its incense? An odor, just
because it is at once concrete and formless,
can carry an appeal overwhelmingly strong
and searching, superseding all other expression.
This is the appeal made to me by the
arbutus. It can never be quite precipitated
into words, but it holds in solution all the
things it has come to mean&mdash;dear human
tradition and beloved companionship, the
poetry of the land and the miracle of new
birth.</p>

<p>In late March or early April I am likely to
see the first blossom on some friend&rsquo;s table&mdash;I
try not to see it first in a florist&rsquo;s display!
To my startled question she gives reassuring
answer, <q>Oh, no, not from around here. This
came from Virginia.</q></p>

<p>Days pass, and, perhaps, the mail brings
some to me, this time from Pennsylvania or
New Jersey, and soon I can no longer ignore
the trays of tight, leafless bunches for sale on
street corners and behind plate-glass windows.
<q>From York State,</q> they tell me. I grow
restive.</p>
<pb n="121"/><anchor id="Pg121"/>

<p><q>Jonathan,</q> I say, holding up a spray for
him to smell, <q>we&rsquo;ve got to go. You can&rsquo;t
resist that. We&rsquo;ll take a day and go for it&mdash;and
trout, too.</q></p>

<p>It is as well that arbutus comes in the trout
season, for to take a day off just to pick a
flower might seem a little absurd. But,
coupled with trout&mdash;all is well. Trout is
food. One must eat. The search for food
needs no defense, and yet, the curious fact is,
that if you go for trout and don&rsquo;t get any, it
doesn&rsquo;t make so much difference as you
might suppose, but if you go for arbutus and
don&rsquo;t get any, it makes all the difference in
the world. And so Jonathan knows that in
choosing his brook for that particular day,
he must have regard primarily to the arbutus
it will give us and only secondarily to the
trout.</p>

<p>Every one knows the kind of brook that is,
for every one knows the kind of country
arbutus loves&mdash;hilly country, with slopes
toward the north; bits of woodland, preferably
with pine in it, to give shade, but not too
deep shade; a scrub undergrowth of laurel
and huckleberry and bay; and always, somewhere
<pb n="122"/><anchor id="Pg122"/>
within sight or hearing, water. It is
curious how arbutus, which never grows in
wet places, yet seems to like the neighborhood
of water. It loves the slopes above a brook
or the shaggy hillsides overlooking a little
pond or river.</p>

<p>Fortunately, there is such a brook, in just
such country, on our list. There are not so
many trout as in other brooks, but enough to
justify our rods; and not so much arbutus as
I could find elsewhere, but enough&mdash;oh,
enough!</p>

<p>To this brook we go. We tie Kit at the
bridge, Jonathan slings on a fish-basket, to do
for both, and I take a box or two for the
flowers. But from this moment on our interests
are somewhat at variance. The fact is,
Jonathan cares a little more about the trout
than about the arbutus, while I care a little
more about the arbutus than about the
trout. His eye is keenly on the brook, mine
is, yearningly, on the ragged hillsides that roll
up above it.</p>

<p>Jonathan feels this. <q>There isn&rsquo;t any for
two fields yet&mdash;might as well stick to the
brook.</q></p>
<pb n="123"/><anchor id="Pg123"/>

<p><q>I know. I thought perhaps I&rsquo;d go on
down and let you fish this part. Then I&rsquo;d
meet you beyond the second fence&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, no, that won&rsquo;t do at all. Why, there&rsquo;s
a rock just below here&mdash;down by that wild
cherry&mdash;where I took out a beauty last
year, and left another. I want you to go
down and get him.</q></p>

<p><q>You get him. I don&rsquo;t mind.</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, but I mind. Here, I&rsquo;ve got it all
planned: there&rsquo;s a bit of brush-fishing just
below&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>No brush-fishing for me, please!</q></p>

<p><q>That&rsquo;s what I&rsquo;m saying, if you&rsquo;ll only
give me time. I&rsquo;ll take that&mdash;there are
always two or three in there&mdash;and when
you&rsquo;ve finished here you can go around me
and fish the bend, under the hemlocks, and
then the first arbutus is just beside that, and
I&rsquo;ll join you there.</q></p>

<p><q>Well</q>&mdash;I assent grudgingly&mdash;<q>only,
really, I&rsquo;d be just as happy if you&rsquo;d fish the
whole thing and let me go right on down&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>No, you wouldn&rsquo;t. Now, remember to
sneak before you get to that rock. Drop in
six feet above it and let the current do the
<pb n="124"/><anchor id="Pg124"/>
rest. They&rsquo;re awfully shy. I expect you to
get at least one there, and two down at the
bend.</q> He trudges off to his brush-fishing
and leaves me bound in honor to extract a
trout from under that rock. I deposit my
boxes in the meadow above it, and <q>sneak</q>
down. The sneak of a trout fisherman is like
no other form of locomotion, and I am convinced
that the human frame was not evolved
with it in mind. But I resort to it in deference
to Jonathan&rsquo;s prejudices&mdash;in deference,
also, to the fact that when I do not the trout
seldom bite. And Jonathan is so trustfully
counting on my getting that trout!</p>

<p>I did get him. I dropped in my line, as per
directions, and let the current do the rest;
had the thrill of feeling the line suddenly
caught and drawn under the rock, held, then
wiggled slightly; I struck, felt the weight,
drew back steadily, and in a few moments
there was a flopping in the grass behind me.</p>

<p>So that was off my mind.</p>

<p>I strung him on a twig of wild cherry,
gathered up my boxes, and wandered along
the faint path, back of the patch of brush
where, I knew, Jonathan was cheerfully
<pb n="125"/><anchor id="Pg125"/>
threading his line through tangles of twig,
briar, and vine, compared with which the
needle&rsquo;s eye is as a yawning barn door.
Jonathan&rsquo;s attitude toward brush-fishing is
something which I respect without understanding.
Down one long field I went, where
the brook ran in shallow gayety, and there,
ahead, was the bend, a sudden curve of
water, deepening under the roots of an overhanging
hemlock. I climbed the stone wall
beside, glanced at the water&mdash;very trouty
water indeed&mdash;glanced at the hill-pasture
above&mdash;very arbutusy indeed&mdash;laid down
my rod and my trout and my box, and ran
up the low bank to a clump of bay and berry-bushes
that I thought I remembered.&hellip;
Yes! There it was! I had remembered! Ah!
The dear things!</p>

<p>When you first find arbutus, there is only
one thing to do:&mdash;lie right down beside it.
Its fragrance as it grows is different from
what it is after it is picked, because with the
sweetness of the blossoms is mingled the good
smell of the earth and of the woody twigs and
of the dried grass and leaves. And there are
other rewards one gets by lying down. It is
<pb n="126"/><anchor id="Pg126"/>
all very well to talk proudly about man&rsquo;s
walking with his head erect and his face to
the heavens, but if we keep that posture all
the time we miss a good deal. The attitude
of the toad and the lizard is not to be scorned,
though when the needs of locomotion convert
it into the fisherman&rsquo;s <q>sneak,</q> it is, as I
have suggested, to be sparingly indulged in.
But if we could only nibble now and then
from <q>the other side</q> of Alice&rsquo;s mushroom,
what a new outlook we should get on the
world that now lies about our feet! What
new aspects of its beauty would be revealed
to us: the forest grandeurs of the grass, the
architecture of its slim shafts with their pillared
aisles and pointed arches of interlocking
and upspringing curves, their ceiling traceries
of spraying tops against a far-away background
of sky!</p>

<p>To know arbutus, you must stoop to its
level, and look across the fine, frosty fur of
its stiff little leaves, and feel the nestle of its
stems to the ground, the little up-fling of their
tips toward the sun, and the neat radiance
of its flower clusters, with their blessed
fragrance and their pure, babyish color.</p>
<pb n="127"/><anchor id="Pg127"/>

<p>But after that? You want to pick it. Yes,
you really want to pick it!</p>

<p>In this it is different from other flowers.
Most of them I am well content to leave
where they grow. In fact, the love of picking
things&mdash;flowers or anything else&mdash;is a
youthful taste: we lose it as we grow older;
we become more and more willing to appreciate
without acquiring, or rather, appreciation
becomes to us a finer and more spiritual
form of acquiring. Is it possible that, after all,
the old idea of heaven as a state of enraptured
contemplation is in harmony with the trend
of our development?</p>

<p>But if there is arbutus in heaven, I shall
need to develop a good deal further not to
want to pick it. It suggests picking; it
almost invites it. There is something about
the way it nestles and hides, that makes you
want to see it better. Here is a spray of pure
white, living under a green tent of overlapping
leaves; one must raise it, and nip off just one
leaf, so that the blossoms can see out. There
is another, a pink cluster, showing faintly
through the dry, matted grass. You feel for
the stem, pull it gently, and, lo, it is many
<pb n="128"/><anchor id="Pg128"/>
stems, which have crept their way under the
tangle, and every one is tipped with a cluster
of stars or round little buds each on its long
stem, fairly begging to be picked. It gets
picked.</p>

<p>Yet sometimes its very beauty has stayed
my hand. I shall never forget one clump I
found, growing out of a bank of deep green
moss, partly shaded by a great hemlock. The
soft pink blossoms&mdash;luxuriant leafy sprays of
them&mdash;were lying out on the moss in a pagan
carelessness of beauty, as though some
god had willed it there for his pleasure. I sat
beside it a long time, and in the end I left it
without picking it.</p>

<p>On this particular day, Jonathan being
still lost in the brush patch, I had risen
from my visit with the first-discovered blossoms
and wandered on, from clump to clump,
wherever the glimpse of a leaf attracted me,
picking the choicest here and there and
dropping them into my box. After I do not
know how long, I was roused by Jonathan&rsquo;s
whistle. I was some distance up the hillside
by this time, and he was beside the brook, at
the bend.</p>
<pb n="129"/><anchor id="Pg129"/>

<p><q>What luck?</q> he called.</p>

<p><q>Good luck! I&rsquo;ve found lots. Come up!</q></p>

<p>He took a few steps up toward me, so that
conversation could drop from shouting to
speaking levels. <q>How many did you get?</q>
he asked.</p>

<p><q>How many?&hellip; Oh &hellip; why &hellip; Oh, I
got one up there where you showed me&mdash;under
the rock, you know.</q></p>

<p><q>Good one?</q></p>

<p><q>Eight inches. He&rsquo;s down there by the
bars.</q></p>

<p><q>Good! And what about the bend?</q></p>

<p><q>The bend? Oh, I didn&rsquo;t fish there&mdash;look
at these! Aren&rsquo;t they beauties?</q> I
came down the hill to hold my open box up
to his face. But my casual word almost
effaced the scent of the flowers.</p>

<p><q>Ah&mdash;yes&mdash;delicious&mdash;didn&rsquo;t fish
there? Why not? Did they see you?</q></p>

<p><q>Who? The trout? I don&rsquo;t know. But I
saw this. And I just had to pick it.</q></p>

<p><q>Well! You&rsquo;re a great fisherman! And with
that water right there beside you! Lord!</q></p>

<p><q>With the arbutus right here beside me!
Lord!</q></p>
<pb n="130"/><anchor id="Pg130"/>

<p><q>But the arbutus would wait.</q></p>

<p><q>But the trout would wait. They&rsquo;re waiting
for you now, don&rsquo;t you hear them? Go
and fish there!</q></p>

<p><q>No. That&rsquo;s your pool.</q> Jonathan has a
way of bestowing a trout-pool on me as if it
were a bouquet. To refuse its opportunities
is almost like throwing his flowers back in his
face.</p>

<p><q>Well&mdash;of course it&rsquo;s a beautiful pool&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>Best on the brook,</q> murmured Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>But, truly, I&rsquo;d enjoy it just as much to
have you fish it.</q></p>

<p><q>Nobody can fish it now for a while. I
thought you&rsquo;d be there, of course, and I came
stamping along down, close by the bank.
They wouldn&rsquo;t bite now&mdash;not for half an
hour, anyway.</q></p>

<p><q>Well, then, that&rsquo;s just right. We&rsquo;ll go on
up the hillside for half an hour, and then come
back and fish it. Set your rod up against the
bayberry here, and come along&mdash;look there!
you&rsquo;re almost stepping on some!</q></p>

<p>Jonathan, gradually adjusting himself to
the turn of things, stood his rod up against
the bush with the meticulous care of the true
<pb n="131"/><anchor id="Pg131"/>
sportsman. <q>Where did you leave yours?</q>
he asked, with a suspiciousness born of a
deep knowledge of my character.</p>

<p><q>Oh, down by the bars.</q></p>

<p><q>Standing up or lying down?</q></p>

<p><q>Lying down, I think. It&rsquo;s all right.</q></p>

<p><q>It&rsquo;s not all right if it&rsquo;s lying down. Anything
might trample on it.</q></p>

<p><q>For instance, what?&mdash;birds or crickets?</q></p>

<p><q>For instance, people or cows.</q> He strode
down the hill, and I saw him stoop. As he
returned I could read disapproval in his gait.
<q>Will you never learn how to treat a rod!
It was lying just beyond the bars. I must
have landed within two feet of it when I
jumped over.</q></p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;m sorry. I meant to go back. I know
perfectly how to treat a rod. My trouble
comes in knowing when to apply my knowledge.&hellip;
Well, let&rsquo;s go up there. Near those
big hemlocks there&rsquo;s some, I remember.</q>
And we wandered on, separating a little to
scan the ground more widely.</p>

<p>Once having pried his mind away from the
trout, Jonathan was as keen for arbutus as I
could wish, and soon I heard an exclamation,
<pb n="132"/><anchor id="Pg132"/>
and saw him kneel. <q>Oh, come over!</q> he
called; <q>you really ought to see this growing!</q></p>

<p><q>But there&rsquo;s some I want, right here,
that&rsquo;s lovely&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>Never mind. Come and see this&mdash;oh,
come!</q></p>

<p>Of course I come, and of course I am glad I
came, and of course soon I am obliged to call
Jonathan to see some I have found&mdash;<q>Jonathan,
it is truly the loveliest
<hi rend="font-style: italic">yet!</hi> It&rsquo;s the
way it grows&mdash;with the moss and all&mdash;please
come!</q> And of course he comes.</p>

<p>We had been on the hillside a long half-hour,
much nearer an hour, when Jonathan
began to grow restive. <q>Don&rsquo;t you think you
have enough?</q> he suggested several times.
Finally, he spoke plainly of the trout.</p>

<p><q>Oh, yes, of course,</q> I said, <q>you go down
and I&rsquo;ll follow just as soon as I&rsquo;ve gone along
that upper path.</q></p>

<p>Not at all. That was not what was wanted.
So I turned and we went down the hill, back
to the bend, whose seductions I had been so
puzzlingly able to resist. I am sure Jonathan
has never yet quite understood how I could
<pb n="133"/><anchor id="Pg133"/>
leave that bit of water at my left hand and
turn away to the right.</p>

<p><q>Now&mdash;sneak!</q></p>

<p>We sneaked, and I sank down just back of
the edge of the bank. Jonathan crouched
some feet behind, coaching me:&mdash;<q>Now&mdash;draw
out a little more line&mdash;not too much&mdash;there&mdash;and
have some slack in your hand.
Now, up-stream fifteen feet&mdash;allow for the
wind&mdash;wait till that gust passes&mdash;now!
Good! First-rate! Now let her drift&mdash;there&mdash;what
did I tell you? Give him line! <hi rend="font-style: italic">Give</hi> him
line! Now, feel of him&mdash;careful! You&rsquo;ll
know when to strike &hellip; there!&hellip; Oh! too
bad!</q></p>

<p>For as I struck, my line held fast.</p>

<p><q>Snagged, by gummy! Can&rsquo;t you pull
clear?</q></p>

<p><q>Not without stirring up the whole pool.
You&rsquo;ll have to do the fishing, after all.</q></p>

<p><q>Oh! <hi rend="font-style: italic">too</hi>
bad! That&rsquo;s hard luck!</q></p>

<p><q>Not a bit. I like to watch you do it.</q></p>

<p>And so indeed I did. Once having realized
that I was temporarily laid by, Jonathan put
his whole mind on the pool, while I, being
honorably released from all responsibility,
<pb n="134"/><anchor id="Pg134"/>
except that of keeping my line taut, could
put my whole mind on his performance.
There is a little the same sort of pleasure in
watching the skillful handling of a rod that
there is in watching the bow-action of a
violinist. Both things demand the utmost
nicety of adjustment: body, arm, wrist, fingers
uniting in an interplay of efficiency exactly
adapted to the intricately shifting needs
of each moment.</p>

<p>Thus I watched, through the typical stages
of the sport: the delicate flip of the bait into
the current at just the right spot; its swift
descent, imperceptibly guided by the rod&rsquo;s
quivering tip; its slower drift toward deep
water; its sudden vanishing, and the whir of
the reel as the line goes out; then the pause,
the critical moments of <q>feeling for him</q>; at
last the strike &hellip; and then, a flopping in the
grass behind me, and Jonathan crawling
back to kill and unhook him.</p>

<p><q>Don&rsquo;t get up. There&rsquo;s probably another
one,</q> he said; and soon, by the same reptilian
methods, was back for another try. There
was another one, and yet another, and then a
little fellow, barely hooked. <q>That&rsquo;s all,</q>
<pb n="135"/><anchor id="Pg135"/>
said Jonathan, as he rose to put him back into
the pool, and we watched the pretty spotted
creature fling himself upstream with a wild
flourish of his gleaming body.</p>

<p><q>Now I&rsquo;ll get you clear,</q> said Jonathan,
wading out into the water, and, with sleeves
rolled high, feeling deep, deep down under
the opposite bank. <q>He had you all right&mdash;it&rsquo;s
wound round a root and then jabbed
deep into it &hellip; hard luck! I wanted you to
get those fellows!</q> And to this day I am sure
he remembers those trout with a tinge of
regret.</p>

<p>I had intended leaving him to fish the rest
of the brook, while I went back to that upper
path to look up two or three special arbutus
clumps that I knew, but seeing his depression
over the snag incident, I could not suggest
this. Instead I followed the stream with him,
accepting his urgent offer of all the best pools,
while he, taking what was left, drew out perfectly
good trout from the most unhopeful-looking
bits of water. And at the end, there
was time to return along the upper path and
visit my old friends, so both of us were satisfied.</p>
<pb n="136"/><anchor id="Pg136"/>

<p>On such days, however, there is always one
person who is not satisfied, and that is, Kit
the horse. Kit has borne with our vagaries
for many years, but she has never come to
understand them. She never fails to greet
our return, as our voices come within the
range of her pricked-up ears, by a prolonged
and reproachful whinny, which says as plainly
as is necessary, <q>Back? Well&mdash;I should
<hi rend="font-style: italic">think</hi> it was time!
<hi rend="font-style: italic">I should think it was
TIME!</hi></q> Now and then we have thought it
would be pleasant to have a little motor-car
that could be tucked away at any roadside,
without reference to a good hitching-place,
but if we had it, I am sure we should miss that
ungracious welcoming whinny. We should
miss, too, the exasperated violence of Kit&rsquo;s
pace on the first bit of the home road&mdash;a
violence expressing in the most ostentatious
manner her opinion of folks who keep a respectable
horse hitched by the roadside, far
from the delights of the dim, sweet stable
and the dusty, sneezy, munchy hay.</p>

<p>But leaving out this little matter of Kit&rsquo;s
preference, and also the other little matter of
the trout&rsquo;s preference, I feel sure that an arbutus-trouting
<pb n="137"/><anchor id="Pg137"/>
is peculiarly satisfying. It meets
every human need&mdash;the need of food and
beauty, the need of feeling strong and skillful,
the need of becoming deeply aware of
nature as living and kind. Moreover, it is
very satisfying afterwards. As we sat that
evening, over a late supper, with a shallow
dish of arbutus beside us, I remarked, <q>The
advantage of getting arbutus is, that you
bring the whole day home with you and
have it at your elbow.</q></p>

<p><q>The advantage of getting trout,</q> remarked
Jonathan dreamily, as if to himself,
<q>is, that you bring your whole day home
with you, and have it for breakfast.</q></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="chapter07">
<pb n="138"/><anchor id="Pg138"/>
<index index="toc" level1="VII. Without the Time of Day"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="VII. Without the Time of Day"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">VII</head>
<head type="sub">Without the Time of Day</head>

<p><q>Jonathan, did you ever live without a
clock,&mdash;whole days, I mean,&mdash;days and
days&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>When I was a boy&mdash;most of the time, I
suppose. But the family didn&rsquo;t like it.</q></p>

<p><q>Of course. But did you like it?</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, I liked it all. I seem to remember
getting pretty hungry sometimes, but it&rsquo;s all
rather good as I look back on it.</q></p>

<p><q>Let&rsquo;s do it!</q></p>

<p><q>Now?</q></p>

<p><q>No. Society is an enlarged family, and
wouldn&rsquo;t like it. But this summer, when
we camp.</q></p>

<p><q>How do you know we&rsquo;re going to camp?</q></p>

<p><q>The things we know best we don&rsquo;t always
know how we know.</q></p>

<p><q>Well, then,&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">if</hi>
we camp&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q><hi rend="font-style: italic">When</hi>
we camp&mdash;let&rsquo;s live without a
watch.</q></p>

<p><q>You&rsquo;d need one to get there.</q></p>
<pb n="139"/><anchor id="Pg139"/>

<p><q>Take one, and let it run down.</q></p>

<p>As it turned out, my <q>when</q> was truer
than Jonathan&rsquo;s <q>if.</q> We did camp. We
did, however, use watches to get there: when
we expressed our baggage, when we sent our
canoe, when we took the trolley car and the
train; and the watch was still going as our
laden craft nosed gently against the bank of
the river-island that was to be our home for
two weeks. It was late afternoon, and the
shadows of the steep woods on the western
bank had already turned the rocks in midstream
from silver to gray, and dimmed the
brightness of the swift water, almost to the
eastern shore.</p>

<p><q>Will there be time to get settled before
dark?</q> I asked, as we stepped out into the
shallow water and drew up the canoe to unload.</p>

<p><q>Shall I look at my watch to see?</q> asked
Jonathan, with a note of amiable derision in
his voice.</p>

<p><q>Well, I <hi rend="font-style: italic">should</hi>
rather like to know what
time it is. We won&rsquo;t begin till to-morrow.</q></p>

<p><q>You mean, we won&rsquo;t begin to stop watching.
All right. It&rsquo;s just seventeen and a half
<pb n="140"/><anchor id="Pg140"/>
minutes after five. I&rsquo;ll give you the seconds
if you like.</q></p>

<p><q>Minutes will do nicely, thank you.</q></p>

<p><q>Lots of time. You collect firewood while
I get the tent ready. Then it&rsquo;ll need us both
to set it up.</q></p>

<p>We worked busily, happily. Ah! The joyous
elation of the first night in camp! Is
there anything like it? With days and days
ahead, and not even one counted off the
shining number! All the good things of
childhood and maturity seem pressed into
one mood of flawless, abounding happiness.</p>

<p>By dark the tent was up, the baggage
stowed, the canoe secured, the fire glowing
in a bed of embers, and we sat beside it, looking
out past the glooms of the hemlocks
across the moonlit river,&mdash;sat and ate city-cooked
chicken and sandwiches and drank
thermos-bottled tea.</p>

<p><q>To-morrow we&rsquo;ll cook,</q> I said. <q>To-night
it&rsquo;s rather nice not to have to. Look at
the moonlight on that rock! How black it
makes the eddy below!</q></p>

<p><q>Good bass under there,</q> said Jonathan.
<q>We&rsquo;ll get some to-morrow.</q></p>
<pb n="141"/><anchor id="Pg141"/>

<p><q>Maybe.</q></p>

<p><q>Well, of course, it&rsquo;s always maybe, with
bass. Well&mdash;I&rsquo;m done&mdash;and it&rsquo;s quarter to
ten&mdash;late! Oh! Excuse me! Maybe you&rsquo;d
rather I hadn&rsquo;t told you. By the way, do I
wind my watch to-night or not?</q></p>

<p><q>Not.</q></p>

<p><q>Not it is, then. Sure you wouldn&rsquo;t rather
have it wound, though? We can leave it
hanging in the tent. It won&rsquo;t break loose and
bite you.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, it would. There would be a something&mdash;a
taint&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, <hi rend="font-style: italic">all</hi> right!</q></p>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<p>We slept with the murmur of the river
running through our dreams,&mdash;a murmur of
many voices: deep voices, high voices, grumbling
voices as the stones go grinding and rolling
along the ever-changing bottom,&mdash;and
only half roused when the dawn chorus of
the birds filled the air. That dawn chorus was
something we should have been loath to miss.
Through the first gray of the morning there
comes a stir in the woods, an expectant
tremor; a bird peeps softly and is still; then
<pb n="142"/><anchor id="Pg142"/>
another, and another, <q>softly conferring together.</q>
As the light grows warmer, comes a
clearer note from some leader, then a full,
complete song; another, and the woods are
awake, flinging out their wonderful song-greeting
to the morning. There is in it a prodigality
of swift-changing beauty like ocean
surf: a continuous and intricate interweaving
of rhythms, pulses and ebbings of clear tone,
beautiful phrases rising antiphonal, showerings
of bright notes, moments of subsidence,
almost of pause. As the light grows and
sharpens, the music reaches a crescendo of
exuberance, and at last dies down as real day
comes, bringing with it the day&rsquo;s work. On
our island the leader of the chorus was almost
always a song sparrow, though once or
twice a wood thrush came over from the shore
woods and filled the hemlock shadows with
the limpid splendors of his song.</p>

<p>Hearing the chorus through our dreams,
we slept again, and when I really waked the
sun was high, flecking the eastern V of our
tent with dazzling patches. I heard Jonathan
moving about outside, and the crackling of
a new-made fire. I went to the front of the
<pb n="143"/><anchor id="Pg143"/>
tent and looked out. Yes, there they were,
the fire and Jonathan, in a quiet space of
shade where the early coolness still hung.
Beyond them, half shut out from view by
the low-spreading hemlock boughs, was the
open river&mdash;such gayety of swift water!
Such dazzle of midsummer morning! I drew
back, eager to be out in it.</p>

<p><q>Bacon and eggs, is it?</q> called Jonathan,
<q>or shall I run down and try for a bass?</q></p>

<p><q>Don&rsquo;t!</q> I called. I knew that if he once
got out after bass he was lost to me for the
day. And now we had cut loose from even
the mild tyranny of his watch. As I thought
of this I went over to the many-forked tree,
whose close-trimmed branches served our tent
as hat-rack, clothes-rack, everything-that-can-hang-or-perch-rack,
and opened Jonathan&rsquo;s
watch.</p>

<p><q>Well, what time is it?</q> Jonathan was
peering in between the tent-flaps.</p>

<p><q>Twenty-two minutes before five.</q></p>

<p><q>A.M., I judge. Sorry you didn&rsquo;t let me
wind it?</q></p>

<p><q>Not a bit. I was just curious to see when
it stopped, that was all.</q></p>
<pb n="144"/><anchor id="Pg144"/>

<p><q>Well, now you know. Hereafter the official
time for the camp is
<reg orig="4.38"><anchor id='E1'/><ref target="e1">4:38</ref></reg>&mdash;<hi
rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.M.</hi>
or <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">P.M.</hi>,
according to taste. Come along. The bacon&rsquo;s
done, and I&rsquo;m blest if I want to drop in the
eggs.</q></p>

<p>Dropping an egg will never, I fear, be one
of Jonathan&rsquo;s most finished performances.
He watched me do it with generous admiration.
<q>If you could just get over being
scared of them,</q> I suggested, as the last one
plumped into the pan and set up its gentle
sizzle.</p>

<p><q>No use. I <hi rend="font-style: italic">am</hi>
scared of the things. I tap
and tap, and nothing happens, and then I
get mad and tap hard, and they&rsquo;re all over
the place.</q></p>

<p>By the time breakfast was over, even the
coolness under the hemlocks was beginning to
grow warm and aromatic. The birds in the
shore woods were quieter, though out at the
sunny end of our island, where the hemlocks
gave place to low scrub growth, the song
sparrow sang gayly now and then.</p>

<p><q>Now,</q> said Jonathan, <q>what about fishing?</q></p>

<p><q>Well&mdash;let&rsquo;s fish!</q></p>
<pb n="145"/><anchor id="Pg145"/>

<p><q>One up stream and one down, or keep together?</q></p>

<p><q>Together,</q> I decided. <q>If we go two
ways there&rsquo;s no telling when I&rsquo;ll ever see
you again.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, there is: when I&rsquo;m hungry.</q></p>

<p><q>No; some time after you&rsquo;ve noticed
you&rsquo;re hungry.</q></p>

<p><q>Now, if we had watches it would be so
much simpler: we could meet here at, say,
one o&rsquo;clock.</q></p>

<p><q>Simple, indeed! When did you ever look
at a watch when you were fishing, unless I
made you? No, my way is simple, but we
stay together.</q></p>

<p>Of course, in river fishing, <q>together</q> means
simply not absolutely out of sight of each
other. Jonathan may be up to his arm-pits in
mid-current, or marooned on a rock above a
swirling eddy, while I am in a similar situation
beyond calling distance, but so long as a
bend in the river does not cut us off, we are
<q>together,</q> and very companionable togetherness
it is, too. When I see Jonathan wildly
waving to attract my attention, I know he
has either just caught a big bass or else just
<pb n="146"/><anchor id="Pg146"/>
lost one, and this gives me something to smile
over as I wonder which it is. After a time, if
I am catching shiners and no bass, and Jonathan
doesn&rsquo;t seem to be moving, I infer that
his luck is better than mine, and drift along
toward him. Or it may be the other way
around, and he comes to look me up. Bass
are the most uncertain of fish, and no one
can predict when they will elect to bite, or
where. Sometimes they are in the still water,
deep or shallow according to their caprice;
sometimes they hang on the edges of the
rapids; sometimes they are in the dark,
smooth eddies below the great boulders;
sometimes in the clear depths around the
rocks near shore. Each day afresh,&mdash;indeed,
each morning and each afternoon,&mdash;the
fisherman must try, and try, and try, until
he discovers what their choice has been for
that special time. Yet no fisherman who has
once drawn out a good bass from a certain
bit of water can help feeling, next time, that
there is another waiting for him there. That
is one of the reasons why he is always hopeful,
and so always happy. The fish he has caught,
at this well-remembered spot and that, rise
<pb n="147"/><anchor id="Pg147"/>
up out of the past and flick their tails at him;
and all the stretches between&mdash;stretches of
water that have never for him held anything
but shiners, stretches of time diversified by
not even a nibble&mdash;sink into pleasant insignificance.</p>

<p>We banked our fire, stowed everything in
the tent that a thunderstorm would hurt,
and splashed out into the river. There it lay
in all its bright, swift beauty, and we stood
a moment, looking, feeling the push of the
water about our knees and the warmth of the
sun on our shoulders.</p>

<p><q>It makes a difference, sleeping out in it
all,</q> I said. <q>You feel as if it belonged to
you so much more. I quite own the river this
morning, don&rsquo;t you?</q></p>

<p><q>Quite. But not the bass in it. Bet you
don&rsquo;t catch one!</q></p>

<p><q>Bet I beat you!</q></p>

<p><q>Bass, mind you. Sunfish don&rsquo;t count.
You&rsquo;re always catching sunfish.</q></p>

<p><q>They count in the pan. But I&rsquo;ll beat you
on bass. I know some places&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>Who doesn&rsquo;t? All right, go ahead!</q></p>

<p>We were off; Jonathan, as usual, wading
<pb n="148"/><anchor id="Pg148"/>
up to his chest or perched on a bit of boulder
above some dark, slick rapid; I preferring
water not more than waist-deep, and not too
far from shore to miss the responses of the
wood-folk to my passing: soft flurries of
wings; shy, half-suppressed peepings; quick
warning notes; light footfalls, hopping or
running or galloping; the snapping of twigs
and the crushing of leaves. Some sounds tell
me who the creature is,&mdash;the warning of the
blue jay, the whirr of the big ruffed grouse,
the thud of the bounding rabbit,&mdash;but many
others leave me guessing, which is almost
better. When a very big stick snaps, I always
feel sure a deer is stealing away, though Jonathan
assures me that a chewink can break
twigs and <q>kick up a row generally,</q> so that
you&rsquo;d swear it was nothing smaller than a
wild bull.</p>

<p>So we fished that day. When I caught a
bass, which was seldom, I whooped and
waved it at Jonathan, and when I caught a
shiner, which was rather often, I waved it
too, just to keep his mind occupied. Hours
passed, and we met at a bend in the river
where the deep water glides close to shore.</p>
<pb n="149"/><anchor id="Pg149"/>

<p><q>Hungry?</q> I asked.</p>

<p><q>Now you speak of it, yes.</q></p>

<p><q>Shall we go back?</q></p>

<p><q>How can I tell? Now, if we only had that
watch we&rsquo;d know whether we ought to be
hungry or not.</q></p>

<p><q>What does that matter, if we
<hi rend="font-style: italic">are</hi> hungry?
Besides, if you&rsquo;d had a watch, you&rsquo;d have
had to carry it in your teeth. You know perfectly
well you wouldn&rsquo;t have brought it,
anyway.</q></p>

<p><q>Well&mdash;then, at least when we got back,
we should have known whether we ought to
have been hungry or not. Now we shall never
know.</q></p>

<p><q>Never! Oh! Look there, Jonathan!
We&rsquo;re going to catch it!</q> A sense of growing
shadow in the air had made me look up, and
there, back of the steep-rising woods, hung a
blue-black cloud, with ragged edges crawling
out into the brightness of the sky.</p>

<p><q>Sure enough! The bass&rsquo;ll bite now, if it
really comes. Wait till the first drops, and
see what you see.</q></p>

<p>We had not long to wait. There came that
sudden expectancy in the air and the trees,
<pb n="150"/><anchor id="Pg150"/>
the strange pallor in the light, the chill sweep
of wind gusts with warm pauses between.
Then a few big drops splashed on the dusty,
sun-baked stones about us.</p>

<p><q>Now! Wade right out there, to the edge
of that ledge&mdash;don&rsquo;t slip over, it&rsquo;s deep.
I&rsquo;ll go down a little way.</q></p>

<p>I waded out carefully, and cast, in the
smooth, dark water already beginning to be
rain-pocked. It was surprisingly shivery, that
storm wind! I glanced toward shore to look
for shelter&mdash;I remembered an overhanging
ledge of rock&mdash;then my line went taut! I
forgot about shelter, forgot about being
chilly; I knew it was a good bass.</p>

<p>I got him in&mdash;too big to go through the
hole in my creel&mdash;cast for another&mdash;and
another&mdash;and yet another. The rain began
to fall in sheets, and the wind nearly blew me
over, but who could run away from such
fishing? The surface of the river, deep blue-gray,
seemed rising everywhere in little jets
to meet the rain. Rapids, eddies, still waters,
weedy edges, all looked alike; there were
neither waves nor swirls nor glassy slicks,
but all were roughly furry under the multitudinous
<pb n="151"/><anchor id="Pg151"/>
assaults of the fierce rain-drops.
The sky was mottled lead-color, the wind
blew less strongly, but cold&mdash;cold. And
under that water the bass were biting, my rod
was bending double, my reel softly screaming
as I gave line, and one after another I drew
the fish alongside and dipped them out with
my landing net.</p>

<p>Then, as suddenly as they had begun, they
stopped biting. I waited long minutes;
nothing happened, and all at once I realized
that I was very wet and very cold. Wading
ashore, I saw Jonathan shivering along up
the narrow beach toward me, his shoulders
drawn in to half their natural spread, neck
tucked in between his collar-bones, knees
slightly bent.</p>

<p><q>You can&rsquo;t be cold?</q> I questioned as soon
as he was near enough to hear me through
the slash of the rain and wind.</p>

<p><q>No, of course not; are you?</q></p>

<p>We didn&rsquo;t discuss it, but ran up the bank
to the rock-ledge and crouched under it, our
teeth literally chattering.</p>

<p><q>Did you ever see such fishing?</q> I managed
to stammer.</p>
<pb n="152"/><anchor id="Pg152"/>

<p><q>Great! But oh, <hi rend="font-style: italic">why</hi>
didn&rsquo;t I bring the whiskey bottle?</q></p>

<p><q>Let&rsquo;s run for camp! We can&rsquo;t be wetter.</q></p>

<p>We crawled out into the rain again, and
first sprinted and then dog-trotted along the
river edge. No bird notes now in the woods
beside us, no whirring of wings; only the rain
sounds: soft swishings and drippings and
gusty showerings, very different from the
flat, flicking sounds when rain first starts in
dry woods.</p>

<p>Camp looked a little cheerless, but a blazing
fire, started with dry stuff we had stowed
inside the tent, changed things, and dry
clothes changed them still more, and we sat
within the tent flaps and ate ginger-snaps in
great contentment of spirit while we waited
for the rain to stop.</p>

<p>It did stop, and very soon the fish were
sizzling in the pan.</p>

<p><q>Of course, if we had a watch, now&mdash;</q>
suggested Jonathan, as he carefully tucked
under the pan little sticks of just the right
length.</p>

<p><q>What should we know more than we do
now&mdash;that we&rsquo;re hungry?</q> I asked.</p>
<pb n="153"/><anchor id="Pg153"/>

<p><q>Well, for one thing, we&rsquo;d know what
time it is,</q> replied Jonathan tranquilly.</p>

<p><q>And for another we&rsquo;d know whether it&rsquo;s
dinner or supper I&rsquo;m cooking,</q> I supplemented.
<q>But does it matter? You won&rsquo;t get
anything different, no matter which it is&mdash;just
fish is what you&rsquo;ll get. And pretty soon
the sun will be out, and you can set up a
stick and watch the shadow and make a sundial
for yourself.</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, I don&rsquo;t really care which it is.</q></p>

<p><q>Do you suppose I don&rsquo;t know that! And
meanwhile, you might cut the bread and
make some toast,&mdash;there are some good
embers on your side under the pan,&mdash;and
I&rsquo;ll get the butter, and there we&rsquo;ll be.</q></p>

<p>By the time the toast was made and the
fish curling brownly away from the pan, the
sun had indeed come out, at first pale and
watery, then clear, and still high enough in
the heavens to set the soaked earth steaming
fragrantly with its heat. Odors of hemlock
and wet earth mingled with odors of toast
and fried fish.</p>

<p><q>Um-m! Smell it all!</q> I said. <q>What a lot
we should miss if we didn&rsquo;t eat in the kitchen!</q></p>
<pb n="154"/><anchor id="Pg154"/>

<p><q>Or cook in the dining-room&mdash;which?</q></p>

<p><q>And hear that song sparrow! Doesn&rsquo;t it
sound as if the rain had washed his song a
little cleaner and clearer?</q></p>

<p>There followed the wonderful afterlight
that a short, drenching rain leaves behind it&mdash;a
hush of light, deeply pervasive and
friendly. The sunshine slanted across the
gleaming wet rocks in the river, lit up the
rain-darkened trunks of the hemlocks, glinted
on the low-hanging leaves, and flashed through
the dripping edges of sagging fern fronds. As
twilight came on, we canoed across to the side
of the river where the road lay&mdash;the other side
was steep and pathless woods&mdash;and walked
down to the nearest farmhouse to buy eggs for
the morning. Back again by the light of a
low-hung moon, and across the dim water to
our own island and the embers of our fire.</p>

<p><q>Oh, Jonathan! We never asked them
what time it was!</q> I said. <q>I meant to&mdash;for
your sake&mdash;I thought you&rsquo;d sleep better if
you knew.</q></p>

<p><q>Too bad! Probably I should have. I
thought of it, of course, but was afraid that
if I asked it would spoil your day.</q></p>
<pb n="155"/><anchor id="Pg155"/>

<p><q>It would take something pretty bad to
spoil a day like this one,</q> I said.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<p>Two days later the weather turned still and
warm, the bass refused to bite, and even the
sunfish lay, shy or wary or indifferent, in
their shallow, sunny pools, so we resolved to
walk down the river to the post-office, four
miles away, for possible mail. As we sat on
the steps of the little store, looking it over,&mdash;<q>Here&rsquo;s
news,</q> said Jonathan; <q>Jack and
Molly say they&rsquo;ll run up if we want them,
day after to-morrow&mdash;up on the morning
train, and back on the evening.</q></p>

<p><q>Good! Tell them to come along.</q></p>

<p><q>No&mdash;it&rsquo;s to-morrow&mdash;letter&rsquo;s been here
since yesterday. I&rsquo;ll telegraph.</q></p>

<p>As we tramped home we planned the day.
<q>We&rsquo;ll meet them and all walk up together,</q>
said Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>We&rsquo;d better catch some bass and leave
them all hooked in a pool, ready for them to
pull out,</q> I added; <q>otherwise they may not
catch any. And maybe you&rsquo;d better meet
them and I&rsquo;ll have dinner ready when you
get back.</q></p>
<pb n="156"/><anchor id="Pg156"/>

<p><q>Nonsense! You come, and we&rsquo;ll all get
dinner when we get back. That&rsquo;s what
they&rsquo;re coming for&mdash;to see the whole thing.</q></p>

<p><q>But if it&rsquo;s late&mdash;they&rsquo;ve got to get back
for that down train.</q></p>

<p><q>Well&mdash;time enough.</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, Jonathan! What about catching that
train?</q></p>

<p><q>They&rsquo;ll have watches&mdash;watches that
go.</q></p>

<p><q>But what about our meeting them? The
train arrives at
<reg orig="10.15"><anchor id="E2"/><ref target="e2">10:15</ref></reg>,
they said. What does
<reg orig="10.15"><anchor id="E3"/><ref target="e3">10:15</ref></reg>
look like in the sky, I wonder!</q></p>

<p><q>Or rather, what does 8.45 look like? It
takes an hour and a half to get there, counting
crossing the river.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes&mdash;dear me! Well, Jonathan, we&rsquo;ll
just have to get up early and go, and then
wait.</q></p>

<p><q>Or else take our watch to the farmhouse
and set it.</q></p>

<p><q>Jonathan, I will not! I&rsquo;d rather start at
daylight.</q></p>

<p>Which was very nearly what we did. The
morning opened with a sun obscured, and I
felt sure it was stealing a march on us and
<pb n="157"/><anchor id="Pg157"/>
would suddenly burst out upon us from a
noonday sky. We breakfasted hastily, ferried
across to shore, and set a swinging pace down
the road. As we walked, the sun burned
through the mist, and our shadows came out,
dim, long things, striding with the exaggerated
gait that shadows have, over the grassy
banks to our right.</p>

<p><q>I think,</q> said Jonathan, <q>it may be as
late as seven o&rsquo;clock, but perhaps it&rsquo;s only
six.</q></p>

<p>When we reached the station, the official
clock registered 8.30. We strolled over to the
store-and-post-office and got more letters&mdash;one
from Molly and Jack saying thank you
they&rsquo;d come. <q>They don&rsquo;t entirely understand
our mail system up here,</q> said Jonathan.
We got some ginger-cookies and some
milk and had a second breakfast, and finally
wandered back to the station to wait for the
train. It came, bearing the expected two,
and much friendliness. <q>Get our letter?
There, Jack! He said you wouldn&rsquo;t, but I
said you would. I made him send it &hellip; four
miles to walk? What fun!</q></p>

<p>It was fun, indeed, and all went well until
<pb n="158"/><anchor id="Pg158"/>
after dinner, when Jack&mdash;saying, <q>Well,
maybe we&rsquo;d better be starting back for that
train</q>&mdash;drew out his watch. He opened it,
muttered something, put it to his ear, then
began to wind it rapidly. He wound and
wound. We all laughed.</p>

<p><q>Looks as if you hadn&rsquo;t remembered to
wind it last night,</q> said Jonathan, glancing
at me.</p>

<p><q>I haven&rsquo;t done that in months, hang it!
Give me the time, will you, Jonathan?</q> said
Jack.</p>

<p><q>Sorry!</q> Jonathan was smiling genially.
<q>Mine&rsquo;s run down too. It stopped at
twenty-two minutes before
five&mdash;<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A. M.</hi>, I
think.</q></p>

<p><q>What luck! And Molly didn&rsquo;t bring
hers.</q></p>

<p><q>You told me not to,</q> Molly flicked in.</p>

<p><q>So here we are,</q> said Jonathan, <q>entirely
without the time of day.</q></p>

<p><q>But plenty of real time all round us,</q> I
said. <q>Let&rsquo;s use it, and start.</q> I avoided
Jonathan&rsquo;s eye.</p>

<p>We reached the station with an hour and
ten minutes to spare&mdash;bought more ginger-cookies
<pb n="159"/><anchor id="Pg159"/>
and more milk. As we sat eating
them in the midst of the preternatural calm
that marks a country railroad station outside
of train times, Molly remarked brightly,&mdash;</p>

<p><q>Well, I don&rsquo;t see but we got on just as
well without a watch, didn&rsquo;t we, Jack? Why
do we need watches, anyway? Do
<hi rend="font-style: italic">you</hi> see?</q>
she turned to us. <q>Jack does everything by
his watch&mdash;eats and breathes and sleeps by
it&mdash;</q></p>

<p>Jack returned, watch in hand&mdash;he had
been getting railroad time from the telegraph
operator. <q>Want to set yours while you
think of it?</q> he asked Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>Sorry&mdash;thank you&mdash;didn&rsquo;t bring it,</q>
said Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>By George, man, what&rsquo;ll you do?</q> Real
consternation sounded in Jack&rsquo;s tones.</p>

<p><q>Oh, we&rsquo;ll get along somehow,</q> said Jonathan.
<q>You see, we don&rsquo;t have many engagements,
except with the bass, and they
never meet theirs, anyhow.</q></p>

<p>When the train had gone, I said, <q>Jonathan,
why didn&rsquo;t you tell them it was my
whim?</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, I just didn&rsquo;t,</q> said Jonathan.</p>
<pb n="160"/><anchor id="Pg160"/>

<p>As Jonathan had predicted, we did get
along somehow&mdash;got along rather well, on
the whole. There are, of course, some drawbacks
to an unwatched life. You never want
to start the next meal till you are hungry,
and after that it takes one or two or three
hours, as the case may be, to go back to
camp and get the meal ready, and by that
time you are almost hungrier than you like
being. But except for this, and the little
matter of meeting trains, it is rather pleasant
to break away from the habit of watching the
watch, and it was with real regret that, on the
last night of our camp, we took our watch
to the farmhouse to set it.</p>

<p><q>Run down, did it? Guess you forgot to
wind it. Well&mdash;we do forget things sometimes,
all of us do,</q> the farmer&rsquo;s wife said
comfortingly as she went to look at the clock.
<q>Twenty minutes to seven, our clock says.
It&rsquo;s apt to be fast, so I guess you won&rsquo;t miss
any trains. Father he says he&rsquo;d rather have
a clock fast than slow any day, but it don&rsquo;t
often get more than ten minutes wrong either
way.</q></p>

<p>And to us, after our two weeks of camp,
<pb n="161"/><anchor id="Pg161"/>
ten minutes&rsquo; error in a clock seemed indeed
slight.</p>

<p><q>Jonathan,</q> I said, as we walked back
along the road, <q>I hate to go back to clock
time. I like real time better.</q></p>

<p><q>You couldn&rsquo;t do so many things in a
day,</q> said Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>No&mdash;maybe not.</q></p>

<p><q>But maybe that wouldn&rsquo;t matter.</q></p>

<p><q>Maybe it wouldn&rsquo;t,</q> I said.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="chapter08">
<pb n="162"/><anchor id="Pg162"/>
<index index="toc" level1="VIII. The Ways of Griselda"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="VIII. The Ways of Griselda"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">VIII</head>
<head type="sub">The Ways of Griselda</head>

<p><q>Of course you don&rsquo;t know what her name
is,</q> I said, as we stood examining the sleek
little black mare Jonathan had just brought
up from the city.</p>

<p><q>No. Forgot to ask. Don&rsquo;t believe they&rsquo;d
have known anyway&mdash;one of a hundred or
so.</q></p>

<p><q>Well, we&rsquo;ll name her again. Dear me&mdash;she&rsquo;s
rather plain! Probably she&rsquo;s useful.</q></p>

<p><q>Hope so,</q> said Jonathan. Then, stepping
back a little, in a slightly grieved tone, <q>But
I don&rsquo;t call her plain. Wait till she&rsquo;s groomed
up&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>It&rsquo;s that droop of her neck&mdash;sort of patient&mdash;and
the way she drops one of her
hips&mdash;if they are hips.</q></p>

<p><q>But we want a horse to be patient.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes. I don&rsquo;t know that I care about having
her <hi rend="font-style: italic">look</hi> so terribly much so as this. I
think I&rsquo;ll call her Griselda.</q></p>
<pb n="163"/><anchor id="Pg163"/>

<p><q>Now, why Griselda?</q></p>

<p><q>Why, don&rsquo;t you know? She was that
patient creature, with the horrid husband
who had to keep trying to see just how patient
she was. It&rsquo;s a hateful story&mdash;enough
to turn any one who brooded on it into a militant
suffragette.</q></p>

<p><q>But you can&rsquo;t call a horse Griselda&mdash;not
for common stable use, you know.</q></p>

<p><q>Call her <q>Griz</q> for short. It does very
well.</q></p>

<p>Jonathan jeered a little, but in the family
the name held. Our man Hiram said nothing,
but I think in private he called her
<q>Fan</q> or <q>Beauty</q> or <q>Lady,</q> or some
such regulation stable name.</p>

<p>Called by any name, she pleased us, and
she <hi rend="font-style: italic">was</hi> patient. She trotted peacefully up
hill and down, she did her best at ploughing
and haymaking and all the odd jobs that the
farm supplied. She stood when we left her,
with that same demure, almost overdone
droop of the neck that I had first noticed.
When I met Jonathan at the station, she
stood with her nose against a snorting train,
looking as if nothing could rouse her.</p>
<pb n="164"/><anchor id="Pg164"/>

<p><q>Good little horse you got there,</q> remarked
the station agent. <q>Where&rsquo;d you
find her?</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, I picked her out of a bunch down in
the city,</q> said Jonathan casually. <q>I didn&rsquo;t
think I knew much about horses, but I guess
I was in luck this time.</q></p>

<p><q>Guess you know more about horses than
you&rsquo;re sayin&rsquo;.</q> And Jonathan, thus pressed,
admitted with suitable reluctance that he
<hi rend="font-style: italic">had</hi> now and then been able to detect a good
horse by his own observation.</p>

<p>On the way home he openly congratulated
himself on his find. <q>I really wasn&rsquo;t
sure I knew how to pick out a horse,</q> he remarked,
in a glow of retrospective modesty,
<q>but I certainly got a treasure this time.</q></p>

<p>Griz had been with us about two weeks,
and all went well. Then another horse was
needed for farm work, and one was sent up&mdash;one
Kit by name&mdash;a big, pleasant, rather
stupid brown mare.</p>

<p><q>They do say two mares don&rsquo;t git on so
well together as a mare &rsquo;n a horse,</q> remarked
Hiram.</p>

<p><q>But these are both such quiet creatures,</q>
<pb n="165"/><anchor id="Pg165"/>
I protested, to which Hiram made no answer.
Hiram seldom made an answer unless
fairly cornered into it.</p>

<p>For two or three days after the new arrival
nothing happened, so far as we knew,
except that Griz always laid her ears back,
and looked queer about her under lip, whenever
Kit was led in or out of the stall next
her, while Kit always huddled up close to
her manger whenever Griz was led past her
heels. Once or twice Griz slipped her halter
in the stall, and Hiram said there was a place
on Kit that looked as if she had been kicked,
but when we scrutinized Griz, neck a-droop
and eyes a-blink, we found it hard to think
ill of her. Besides, Jonathan was now fairly
committed to the opinion that he had <q>got
a treasure this time.</q> <q>Kit may have hurt
herself lying down,</q> he suggested, and again
Hiram made no answer.</p>

<p>Then one night, sometime during the very
small, very dark, and very sleepy hours, we
were awakened by awful sounds. <q>What is
it? What <hi rend="font-style: italic">is</hi> it?</q> I gasped.</p>

<p>Crash! Bang! Boom! The trampling of
hoofs!&mdash;heavy, hollow pounding!&mdash;the
<pb n="166"/><anchor id="Pg166"/>
tearing and splintering of wood!&mdash;all coming
from the barn, though loud enough, indeed,
to have come from the next room.</p>

<p>Jonathan was up in an instant muttering,
<q>Where are my rubber boots?&mdash;and my
coat?</q></p>

<p><q>Jonathan! <hi rend="font-style: italic">what</hi>
a combination!</q></p>

<p>But he was gone, and I heard the snap of
the lantern and the slam of the back door
almost before the rocking-chair in the sitting-room
that he had hit&mdash;and talked to&mdash;had
stopped rocking. Then I heard him calling
outside Hiram&rsquo;s window and then he ran
past our window, out to the barn. I wished
he had waited for Hiram, but I had an undercurrent
of pleasure in hearing him run. Jonathan&rsquo;s
theory is that there is never any
hurry, and now and then I like to have this
notion jolted up a little.</p>

<p>Meanwhile the awful sounds had ceased.
There was the rumble of the stable door, a
pause, and Jonathan&rsquo;s voice in conversational
tones. Next came the flashing of Hiram&rsquo;s
lantern, and the <hi rend="font-style: italic">tromp, tromp, tromp</hi>,
in much quicker tempo than usual, of Hiram&rsquo;s
heavy boots. Hiram&rsquo;s theory was a
<pb n="167"/><anchor id="Pg167"/>
good deal like Jonathan&rsquo;s, so this also gave
me pleasure. Finally, there came the flash
of another lantern, and I recognized the
quick, short step of Mrs. Hiram. I smiled to
myself, picturing the meeting between her and
Jonathan, for I knew just how Jonathan was
costumed. In two minutes I heard her steps
repassing, and in five minutes Jonathan returned.
He was chuckling quietly.</p>

<p><q>I guess Griz got all she needed&mdash;didn&rsquo;t
know either of &rsquo;em had so much spunk in &rsquo;em.</q></p>

<p><q>What happened?</q></p>

<p><q>Don&rsquo;t know, exactly, but when I opened
that door, there was Griz, just inside, no halter
on, head down, meek as Moses, as far
away from Kit&rsquo;s heels as she could get&mdash;she&rsquo;s
got the mark of them on her leg and her flank.</q></p>

<p><q>Is she hurt?&mdash;or Kit?</q></p>

<p><q>No, not so far as we can see, not to
amount to anything&mdash;except maybe Griz&rsquo;s
feelings.</q></p>

<p><q>And what about Mrs. Hiram&rsquo;s feelings?</q></p>

<p>Jonathan laughed aloud. <q>I was inside
with Kit, and she called out to know if she
could help.</q></p>

<p><q>And what did you say?</q></p>
<pb n="168"/><anchor id="Pg168"/>

<p><q>I said, <q>Not on your life.</q></q></p>

<p><q>So that was why she came back. Did you
really say,&lsquo;Not on your life,&rsquo; or did you only
imply it in your tone, while you actually said,
&lsquo;No, thank you very much&rsquo;?</q></p>

<p><q>I really said it. At least, I don&rsquo;t remember
conversations the way you do, but I didn&rsquo;t
feel a bit like thanking anybody, and I
don&rsquo;t believe I did.</q></p>

<p><q>Well, I wish I&rsquo;d heard you. One misses a
good deal&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>You can see the stable to-morrow. That&rsquo;ll
keep. They must have had a time of it!
The walls are marked and splintered as high
as I can reach. And I don&rsquo;t believe Kit&rsquo;ll
cringe when Griz passes her any more.</q></p>

<p><q>Of course you remember Hiram
<hi rend="font-style: italic">said</hi> two
mares didn&rsquo;t usually get on very well, and
even when they&rsquo;re chosen by a good judge of
horses&mdash;</q></p>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<p>After that the two did get along peaceably
enough, and Jonathan assured me that all
horses had these little affairs. One day we
drove over to the main street of the village on
an errand.</p>
<pb n="169"/><anchor id="Pg169"/>

<p><q>Will she stand?</q> I questioned.</p>

<p><q>Better hitch her, perhaps,</q> said Jonathan,
getting out the rope. He snapped it
into her bit-ring, then threw the other end
around a post and started to make a half-hitch.
But as he drew up the rope it was suddenly
jerked out of his hand. He looked up
and saw Griselda&rsquo;s patient head waving high
above him on the end of an erect and rebellious
neck, the hitch-rope waggling in loops
and spirals in the air, and the whole outfit
backing away from him with speed and decision.
He was so astonished that he did
nothing, and in a moment Griz had stopped
backing and stood still, her head sagging
gently, the rope dangling.</p>

<p><q>Well&mdash;I&rsquo;ll&mdash;be&mdash;</q> I didn&rsquo;t try to
remember just what Jonathan said he would
be, because it doesn&rsquo;t really matter. We
both stared at Griz as if we had never seen her
before. Griz looked at nothing in particular,
she blinked long lashes over drowsy, dark
eyes, and sagged one hip.</p>

<p><q>She&rsquo;s trying to make believe she didn&rsquo;t
do it&mdash;but she did,</q> I said.</p>

<p><q>Something must have startled her,</q> said
<pb n="170"/><anchor id="Pg170"/>
Jonathan, peering up and down the deserted
street. Two roosters were crowing antiphonally
in near-by yards, and a dog was barking
somewhere far off.</p>

<p><q>What?</q> I said.</p>

<p><q>You never can tell, with a horse.</q></p>

<p><q>No, apparently not,</q> I said, smiling to
myself; and I added hastily, as I saw Jonathan
go forward to her head,
<q><hi rend="font-style: italic">Don&rsquo;t</hi> try it
again, please! I&rsquo;ll stay by her while you go
in. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Please!</hi></q>
For I had detected on Jonathan&rsquo;s
face a look that I very well knew. It was the
same expression he had worn that Sunday he
led the calf to pasture. He made no answer,
but stood examining the hitch-rope.</p>

<p><q>No use,</q> he said, quietly releasing it and
tossing its coil into the carriage, <q>It&rsquo;s too
rotten. If it snapped, she&rsquo;d be ruined.</q></p>

<p>I breathed freer. I privately hoped that all
the hitch-ropes at the farm were rotten.</p>

<p><q>Griz stands perfectly well without hitching,</q>
I said as we drove home, <q>Why do you
force an issue?</q></p>

<p><q>I didn&rsquo;t. She did. She&rsquo;s beaten me. If
I don&rsquo;t hitch her now, she&rsquo;ll know she&rsquo;s master.</q></p>
<pb n="171"/><anchor id="Pg171"/>

<p><q>Oh, dear!</q> I sighed. <q>Let her
<hi rend="font-style: italic">be</hi> master!
Where&rsquo;s the harm? It&rsquo;s just your vanity.</q></p>

<p><q>Perhaps so,</q> said Jonathan.</p>

<p>When he agrees with me like that I know
it&rsquo;s hopeless.</p>

<p>The next night he wheeled in at the big gate
bearing about his shoulders a coil of heavy
rope.</p>

<p><q>It looks like a ship&rsquo;s cable,</q> I said.</p>

<p><q>Yes,</q> he responded, leaning his bicycle
against his side, and swinging the coil over
his head. <q>I want it for mooring purposes.
Think it&rsquo;ll moor Griz?</q></p>

<p><q>Jonathan!</q> I exclaimed, <q>you won&rsquo;t!</q></p>

<p><q>Watch me,</q> said Jonathan, and he proceeded
to explain to me the working of the
tackle.</p>

<p>One end had a ring in it, and as nearly as
I remember, the plan was to put the rope
around her body, under what would be her
arm-pits if she had arm-pits,&mdash;horses&rsquo; joints
are never called what one would expect, of
course,&mdash;run the end through the ring, then
forward between her legs and through the bit-ring.</p>
<pb n="172"/><anchor id="Pg172"/>

<p><q>Then, when she sets back, it cuts her in
two,</q> he concluded cheerfully.</p>

<p><q>But you don&rsquo;t
<hi rend="font-style: italic">want</hi> her in two,</q> I protested.</p>

<p><q>She won&rsquo;t set back,</q> he responded; <q>at
least, not more than once. To-morrow&rsquo;s Sunday;
I&rsquo;ll have to hitch her at church.</q></p>

<p>I hoped it would rain, so we needn&rsquo;t go,
but we were having a drought and the morning
dawned cloudless. We reached the church
just on the last stroke of the bell. The women
were all within; the men and boys lounging
in the vestibule were turning reluctant feet
to follow them.</p>

<p><q>You go right in,</q> said Jonathan, <q>I&rsquo;ll be
in soon.</q></p>

<p>I turned to protest, but he was already
driving round to the side, and a hush had
fallen over the congregation within that made
it embarrassing to call. Besides, one of the
deacons stood holding open the door for me.</p>

<p>I slipped into a pew near the back, with
the apologetic feeling one often has in an old
country church&mdash;a feeling that one is making
the ghosts move along a little. They did
move, of course,&mdash;probably ghosts are always
<pb n="173"/><anchor id="Pg173"/>
polite when one really meets them,&mdash;and
I sat down. Indeed, I was thinking very
little of ghosts that day, or of the minister
either. My ears were cocked to catch and
interpret all the noises that came in through
the open windows on my left. My eyes wandered
in that direction, too, though the clear
panes revealed nothing more exciting than
flickering maple leaves and a sky filmed over
by veils of cloud.</p>

<p>The moralists tell us that what we get out
of any experience depends upon what we
bring to it. What I brought to it that morning
was a mind agog, attuned to receive these
expected outside sounds. To all such sounds
the service within was merely a background&mdash;a
background which didn&rsquo;t know its
place, since it kept pushing itself more or
less importunately into the foreground. I sat
there, of course, with perfect propriety of
demeanor, but my reactions were something
like this:&mdash;</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hymn 912</hi>
&hellip; seven stanzas! horrors! oh!
<hi rend="font-style: italic">omit the 3d, 5th, and
6th</hi>&mdash;well, I should
hope so!&hellip; I can&rsquo;t hear a thing while this
is going on!&hellip; He hasn&rsquo;t come in yet!
<pb n="174"/><anchor id="Pg174"/>
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Scripture reading for
to-day</hi>&mdash;why can&rsquo;t he
give us the passage and let us read it for ourselves?&mdash;well,
his voice is rather high and
uneven, I think I could make out Jonathan&rsquo;s
through the loopholes in it.&hellip; There! What
was that, I wonder! Sounded like shouting,&mdash;oh,
why can&rsquo;t he talk softly! <hi rend="font-style: italic">Let us unite
in prayer.</hi> Ah! now we&rsquo;ll have a long, quiet
time, anyway!&hellip; if only he wouldn&rsquo;t pray
quite so loud! Why pray aloud at all, anyway?
I like the Quaker way best: a good long
strip of silence, where your thoughts can
wash around in any fashion that&mdash;There!
No&mdash;yes&mdash;no&mdash;it&rsquo;s just people going by
on the road.&hellip; Maybe he&rsquo;s in the back of
the church now, waiting for the close of the
prayer. Seems as if I had to look.&hellip; Well,
he isn&rsquo;t.&hellip; <hi rend="font-style: italic">For
thy name&rsquo;s sake, amen.</hi></p>

<p>And then the collection, with an organ
voluntary the while&mdash;now why an organ
voluntary? Why not leave people to their
thoughts some of the time?</p>

<p>And at last, the sermon:&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">The text to
which I wish to call your attention this morning</hi>&mdash;my
attention, forsooth! My attention
was otherwise occupied. Ah! A puff of
<pb n="175"/><anchor id="Pg175"/>
warm, sweet air from behind me, and the soft,
padding noise of the swinging doors, apprised
me of an incomer. A cautious tread in
the aisle&mdash;I moved along a little to make
room.</p>

<p>In a city church probably I should have
thrown propriety to the winds and had the
gist of the story out of him at once, but in a
country church there are always such listening
spaces,&mdash;the very pew-backs and cushions
seem attentive, the hymnals creak in their
racks, and the little stools cry out nervously
when one barely touches them. It was too
much for me. I was coerced into an outer
semblance of decorum. However, I snatched
a hasty glance at Jonathan&rsquo;s face. It was
quite red and hot-looking, but calm, very
calm, and I judged it to be the calm, not of
defeat nor yet of settled militancy, but of
triumph. I even thought I detected the
flicker of a grin,&mdash;the mere atmospheric
suggestion of a grin,&mdash;as if he felt the urgent
if furtive appeal in my glance. At any rate,
Jonathan was all right, that was clear. And
as to Griz&mdash;whether she was still one mare or
two half-mares&mdash;it didn&rsquo;t so much matter.
<pb n="176"/><anchor id="Pg176"/>
And now for the sermon! I gathered myself
to attend.</p>

<p>As we stood up for the last hymn, I whispered,
<q>How did it go?</q></p>

<p><q>All right. She&rsquo;s hitched,</q> was the answer.</p>

<p>After church there was the usual stir of
sociability, and when I emerged into the glare
of the church steps, I saw Jonathan driving
slowly around from the rear. Griz walked
meekly, her head sagged, her eyes blinked.</p>

<p><q>Good quiet little horse you&rsquo;ve got there,</q>
said a deacon over my shoulder; <q>don&rsquo;t get
restless standing, the way some horses do.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, she&rsquo;s very quiet,</q> I said.</p>

<p>I got in, and at last, as we drove off, the
flood-gates of my impatience broke:&mdash;</p>

<p><q>Well?</q> I said,&mdash;<q>well?</q></p>

<p><q>Well&mdash;</q> said Jonathan.</p>

<p><q><hi rend="font-style: italic">Well?
Tell</hi> me about it!</q></p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;ve told you. I hitched her.</q></p>

<p><q>How did you hitch her?</q></p>

<p><q>Just the way I said I would.</q></p>

<p><q>Didn&rsquo;t she mind?</q></p>

<p><q>Don&rsquo;t know.</q></p>

<p><q>Did she make a fuss?</q></p>

<p><q>Not much.</q></p>
<pb n="177"/><anchor id="Pg177"/>

<p><q>What do you mean by much?</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, she set back a little.</q></p>

<p><q>Do any harm?</q></p>

<p><q>No.</q></p>

<p><q>Hurt herself?</q></p>

<p><q>Guess not.</q></p>

<p><q>Jonathan, you drive me distracted&mdash;you
have no more sense for a story&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>But there was nothing in particular&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>Now, Jonathan, if there was nothing in
particular, <hi rend="font-style: italic">why</hi>
didn&rsquo;t you get into church
till the sermon was begun, and why were you
so red and hot?</q></p>

<p>Jonathan smiled indulgently. <q>Why, of
course, she didn&rsquo;t care about being hitched.
I thought you knew that. But it was perfectly
easy.</q></p>

<p>And that was about all I could extract by
the most artful questions. I took my revenge
by telling Jonathan the deacon&rsquo;s compliment
to Griz. <q>He said she didn&rsquo;t get restless
standing, the way so many horses did. I
thought of mentioning that you were a rather
good judge of horses, in an amateur way, but
then I thought it might seem like boasting,
so I didn&rsquo;t.</q></p>
<pb n="178"/><anchor id="Pg178"/>

<p>After that, of course, I didn&rsquo;t really deserve
to hear the whole story, but the next
night I happened to be in the hammock while
Jonathan was talking to a neighbor at the
front gate, and he was relating the incident
with detail enough to have satisfied the most
hungry gossip. Only thus did I learn that
Bill Howard, who had wound the rope twice
round the post to give himself a little leeway,
was drawn right up to the post when she set
back; that they had been afraid the headstall
would tear off; that they had been rather
nervous about the post, and other such little
points, which I had not been clever enough
to elicit by my questions.</p>

<p>Now, why? Probably a man likes to tell a
story when he likes to tell it. I find myself
wondering how much Odysseus told Penelope
about his adventures when she got him to
herself for a good talk. Is it significant that
his really long story was told to the King of
the PhÃ¦acians?</p>

<p>As to Griz:&mdash;it would perhaps not be
worth while to recount her subsequent history.
It was a curious one, consisting of
long stretches of continuous and ostentatious
<pb n="179"/><anchor id="Pg179"/>
meekness, broken by sudden flare-ups which,
after their occurrence, always seemed incredible.
She never again <q>set back</q> when
Jonathan was the one to hitch her, but this
was a concession made to him personally, and
had no effect on her general habits. We
talked of changing her name, but could never
manage it. We thought of selling her, but
she was too valuable&mdash;most of the time. And
when we finally parted from her our relief
was deeply tinged with regret.</p>

<p>I have sometimes wondered whether such
flare-ups were not the natural and necessary
means of recuperation from such depths of
meekness. I have even wondered whether
the original Griselda may not have&mdash;but
this is not a dissertation on early Italian
poetry, nor on the nature of women.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="chapter09">
<pb n="180"/><anchor id="Pg180"/>
<index index="toc" level1="IX. A Rowboat Pilgrimage"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="IX. A Rowboat Pilgrimage"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">IX</head>
<head type="sub">A Rowboat Pilgrimage</head>

<p>We were glad that the plan of the rowboat
cruise dawned upon us almost a year before
it came to pass. We were the gainers by just
that rich length of expectancy.</p>

<p>For the joy that one gets from any cherished
plan is always threefold: there is the joy
of looking forward, the joy of the very doing,
and the joy of remembering. They are all
good, but only the last is eternal. The doing
is hedged between limits, and its pleasures
are often confused, overlaid with alien or accidental
impressions. The joy of the forward
look is pure and keen, but its bounds, too,
are set. It begins at the moment when the
first ray of the plan-idea dawns on one&rsquo;s
mind, and it ends with the day of fulfillment.
If the dawn begins long before the day, so
much the better.</p>

<p>It was early fall, and we had come in from
a day by the river, where we had tramped
<pb n="181"/><anchor id="Pg181"/>
miles up, to one of its infrequent bridges, and
miles down on the other bank. Now we sat
before the fire, talking it over.</p>

<p><q>If we only had a boat!</q> I said.</p>

<p><q>Boat! What do you want a boat for?
You wouldn&rsquo;t want to sit in a boat all day.</q></p>

<p><q>Who said I would? But I want to get
into it, and float off, and get out again somewhere
else. That&rsquo;s my idea of a boat.</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, of course, a boat would be handy&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>Handy! You talk as if it was a buttonhook!</q></p>

<p><q>Well?</q></p>

<p><q>Well&mdash;of course it
<hi rend="font-style: italic">is</hi> handy&mdash;as you
call it&mdash;but a boat means such a lot of
things&mdash;adventure, romance. When you&rsquo;re
in a boat&mdash;a little boat&mdash;anything might
happen.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes,</q> said Jonathan, drawing the logs
together, <q>that&rsquo;s just the way your family
feels about it when you&rsquo;re young.</q></p>

<p>Then we both laughed, and there was a
reminiscent pause.</p>

<p><q>What became of your boat?</q> I asked
finally.</p>

<p><q>Sold. You kept yours.</q></p>
<pb n="182"/><anchor id="Pg182"/>

<p><q>Yes. It&rsquo;s in the cellar, there at Nantucket.
I could have it sent on.</q></p>

<p><q>Cost as much as to buy a new one.</q></p>

<p><q>A new one wouldn&rsquo;t be as good.</q> I
bristled a little. Any one who has owned a
boat is very sensitive about its virtues.</p>

<p><q>How big?</q></p>

<p><q>How should I know? A little boat&mdash;maybe
twelve feet.</q></p>

<p><q>Two oars?</q></p>

<p><q>Four.</q></p>

<p><q>Round bottom?</q></p>

<p><q>Yes. She&rsquo;d ride anything.</q></p>

<p><q>Well</q>&mdash;Jonathan suddenly
expanded&mdash;<q>here&rsquo;s
an idea now! How would you like
to have it sent on to the mainland, and then
row it the rest of the way&mdash;along the Rhode
Island and Connecticut shores?</q></p>

<p>I sat straight up. <q>Jonathan! Let&rsquo;s do it
now!</q></p>

<p>Jonathan chuckled. <q>My! What a hurry
she&rsquo;s in!</q></p>

<p><q>Well, let&rsquo;s!</q></p>

<p><q>We couldn&rsquo;t. The boat will have to be
overhauled first.</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, dear! I suppose so.</q></p>
<pb n="183"/><anchor id="Pg183"/>

<p><q>We could do it next spring, and go up the
trout streams.</q></p>

<p><q>Think of that!</q> I murmured.</p>

<p><q>Or in September and get the shore hunting&mdash;the
salt marshes.</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, which?&mdash;which?</q> Already I was
following our course along curving beaches
and amongst the yellow marshlands. But
Jonathan&rsquo;s mind was working on more practical
details.</p>

<p><q>Twelve feet, you said?</q></p>

<p><q>About that.</q></p>

<p><q>Pretty close stowing for our dunnage&mdash;still&mdash;let&rsquo;s
see&mdash;two guns&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>Or the rods, if we went in the spring.</q></p>

<p><q>And rubber coats, and blankets&mdash;</q></p>

<p><q>Jonathan! Should we camp?</q></p>

<p><q>Might have to.</q></p>

<p><q>Let&rsquo;s, anyway.</q></p>

<p><q>How does that coast-line run? Where&rsquo;s
a map?</q></p>

<p>All we had were some railroad maps and an
old school geography&mdash;just enough to tantalize
us&mdash;but we fell upon them eagerly.
It is curious what a change comes over these
dumb bits of colored paper at such times.
<pb n="184"/><anchor id="Pg184"/>
Every curve of the shore, every bay and headland
came to life and spoke to us&mdash;called to
us.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<p>We decided on the September plan, and for
the next eleven months our casual talk was
starred with inapropos remarks like these:&mdash;</p>

<p><q>Jonathan, I know we shall forget a can-opener.</q></p>

<p><q>Better write it down while you think of it.
And have you put down a hatchet?</q></p>

<p><q>The camera! It isn&rsquo;t on the list!</q></p>

<p><q>Hang it! Those charts haven&rsquo;t come yet!</q></p>

<p><q>What can we take to look respectable in
when we go ashore?</q></p>

<p>Meanwhile the little boat was stirred out
of its long sleep in the cellar, overhauled, and
painted, and shipped to a port up in Narragansett
Bay. And on the last day of August
we found ourselves walking down through
the little town. Following the instructions
of wondering small boys, we came to a gate
in a board fence, opened it and let ourselves
into a typical New England seaport scene&mdash;a
tiny garden, ablaze with sunshine and gorgeous
with the yellows and lavenders of fall
<pb n="185"/><anchor id="Pg185"/>
flowers, and a narrow brick path, under a
grape-vine arch, leading down to the sand
and the wharf and the sparkling blue waters
of the bay. As we passed down through the
garden, we saw a little boat, bottom up, dazzling
white in the sun.</p>

<p><q>There it is!</q> I said, with a surge of reminiscent
affection.</p>

<p><q>That little thing!</q> said Jonathan. <q>I
thought you said twelve feet.</q></p>

<p><q>Well, isn&rsquo;t it? Anyway,
I said <hi rend="font-style: italic">about</hi>.
And it&rsquo;s big enough.</q></p>

<p>He was spanning its length with his hands.</p>

<p><q>Eleven foot six. Oh, I suppose she&rsquo;ll do.
My boat was fourteen.</q></p>

<p><q>Now, don&rsquo;t be so patronizing about your
boat. Wait till you see how mine behaves.</q></p>

<p>He dropped the discussion and got her
launched. Is there anything prettier than a
pretty boat floating beside a dock!</p>

<p>The next morning when we came down we
found her half full of water. <q>She&rsquo;ll be all
right now she&rsquo;s soaked up,</q> said Jonathan,
and we baled her dry and went off to get our
stuff.</p>

<p>I delayed to buy provisions, and when I
<pb n="186"/><anchor id="Pg186"/>
came back I found Jonathan standing on the
float surrounded by plunder of all sorts. He
answered my hail rather solemnly.</p>

<p><q>See here! When this stuff&rsquo;s all stowed,
where are we going to sit? That&rsquo;s what&rsquo;s
worrying me.</q></p>

<p><q>Why, won&rsquo;t it go in?</q></p>

<p><q>Go! It wouldn&rsquo;t go in two boats.</q></p>

<p>I came down the plank. <q>Well, let&rsquo;s eliminate.</q></p>

<p>We eliminated. We took out extra shoes
and coats and <q>town clothes,</q> we cut down
as far as we dared, and expressed a big
bundle home. The rest we got into two
sailor&rsquo;s dunnage bags, one waterproof, the
other nearly so, and one big water-tight
metal box. Then there were the guns, and
the provisions, and the charts in a long tin
tube, and there was a lantern&mdash;a clumsy
thing, which we lashed to a seat. It was always
in the way and proved of very little use,
but we thought we ought to take it.</p>

<p>While we worked, some loungers gathered
on the wharf above and watched us with that
tolerant curiosity that loungers know so well
how to assume. As we got in and took up our
<pb n="187"/><anchor id="Pg187"/>
oars, one of them called out, <q>Now, if you
only had a little motor there in the stern,
you&rsquo;d be all right.</q></p>

<p><q>Don&rsquo;t want one,</q> said Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>What? Why not?</q></p>

<p><q>Go too fast.</q></p>

<p><q>Eh? What say?</q></p>

<p><q>Go&mdash;too&mdash;fast.</q></p>

<p><q>He heard you,</q> I said, <q>but he can&rsquo;t believe
you really said it.</q></p>

<p>The oars fell into unison, there was the dip
of their blades, the grating chunk of the
rowlocks&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">dip-ke-chunk, dip-ke-chunk</hi>.
As we fell into our stroke the little boat began to
respond, the water swished at her bows and
gurgled under her stern. The wharf fell away
behind us, the houses back of it came into
sight, then the wooded hills behind. The
whole town began to draw together, with its
church steeples as its centers.</p>

<p><q>She does go!</q> remarked Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>I told you! Look at us now! Look at that
buoy!</q></p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Dip-ke-chunk, dip-ke-chunk</hi>&mdash;the
red buoy swept by us and dropped into the blue background
of dancing waves.</p>
<pb n="188"/><anchor id="Pg188"/>

<p><q>Are we really off? Is it really happening?</q>
I said joyously.</p>

<p><q>Do you like it?</q> said Jonathan over his
shoulder.</p>

<p><q>No. Do you?</q> To such unwisdom of
speech do people come when they are happy.</p>

<p>But there were circumstances to steady
us.</p>

<p><q>What I&rsquo;m wondering,</q> said Jonathan,
<q>is, what&rsquo;s going to happen next&mdash;when we
get out there.</q> He tilted his head toward the
open bay, broad and windy, ahead of us.
<q>There&rsquo;s some pretty interesting water out
there beyond this lee.</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, she&rsquo;ll take it all right. It&rsquo;s no worse
than Nantucket water. It couldn&rsquo;t be.
You&rsquo;ll see.</q></p>

<p>We did see. In half an hour we were in the
middle of upper Narragansett Bay, trying to
make a diagonal across it to the southwest,
while the long rollers came in steadily from
the south, broken by a nasty chop of peaked,
whitecapped waves. We rowed carefully, our
heads over our right shoulders, watching
each wave as it came on, with broken comments:&mdash;</p>
<pb n="189"/><anchor id="Pg189"/>

<p><q>That&rsquo;s a good one coming&mdash;bring her
up now&mdash;there&mdash;all right, now let her off
again&mdash;hold her so&mdash;there&rsquo;s another
coming&mdash;see?&mdash;that big one, the fifth, the
fourth, away&mdash;row, now&mdash;we beat it&mdash;there
it goes off astern&mdash;see it break!
Here&rsquo;s another&mdash;look out for your oar&mdash;we
can&rsquo;t afford to miss a stroke&mdash;oh, me! Did
that wet you too? My right shoulder is
soaked&mdash;my left isn&rsquo;t&mdash;now it is!</q></p>

<p>But half an hour of this sort of thing
brought about two results&mdash;confidence in
the little boat, which rode well in spite of
her load, and confidence in each other&rsquo;s
rowing. We found that the four oars worked
together, our early training told, and we instinctively
did the same things in each of the
varied emergencies created by wind and
wave. There was no need for orders, and our
talk died down to an exclamation now and
then at some especially big wave, or a laugh
as one of us got a drenching from the white
top of a foaming crest.</p>

<p>It was not an easy day, that first one.&hellip;
It seems, sometimes, as if there were little
imps of malignity that hovered over one
<pb n="190"/><anchor id="Pg190"/>
at the beginning of an undertaking&mdash;little
brownies, using all their charms to try to turn
one back, discouraged. If there be such, they
had a good time with us that long afternoon.
First they had said that we shouldn&rsquo;t load
our boat. Then they sent us rough water.
Then they set the boat a-leak.</p>

<p>For leak it did. The soaking over night
had done no good. It had, indeed, been
<q>thoroughly overhauled</q> and pronounced
seaworthy, but there was the water, too
much to be accounted for as spray, swashing
over the bottom boards, growing undeniably
and most uncomfortably deeper. The imps
made no offer to bale for us, so we had to do
it ourselves, losing the much-needed power
at the oars, while one of us set to work at the
dip-and-toss, dip-and-toss motion so familiar
to any one who has kept company with a
small boat.</p>

<p><q>I wish my mother could see me now&mdash;</q>
hummed Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>I wouldn&rsquo;t wish that.</q></p>

<p><q>Why not?</q></p>

<p><q>What would they all think of us if they
could see us this minute?</q></p>
<pb n="191"/><anchor id="Pg191"/>

<p><q>Just what they have thought for a long
time.</q></p>

<p>I laughed. <q>How true that is, teacher!</q>
I said.</p>

<p>Finding us still cheerful, the imps tried
again.</p>

<p><q>Jonathan&mdash;do you know&mdash;I do believe&mdash;my
rowlock socket is working loose.</q></p>

<p>He cast a quick look over his shoulder
without breaking stroke. Then he said a few
words, explicit and powerful, about the man
who had <q>overhauled</q> the boat. <q>He ought
to be put out in it, in a sea like this, and left
to row himself home.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, of course, but instead, here we are.
It won&rsquo;t last half an hour longer.</q></p>

<p>It did not last ten minutes. There it hung,
one screw pulled loose, the other barely
holding.</p>

<p><q>Take my knife&mdash;you can get it out of
my hip pocket&mdash;and try to set up that screw
with the big blade.</q></p>

<p>I did so, and pulled a few strokes. Then&mdash;<q>It&rsquo;s
come out again. It&rsquo;s no use.</q></p>

<p><q>We make blamed poor headway with one
pair of oars,</q> said Jonathan.</p>
<pb n="192"/><anchor id="Pg192"/>

<p>He meditated.</p>

<p><q>Where are the screw-eyes?</q> he said after
a moment.</p>

<p><q>Oh, good for you! They&rsquo;re in the metal
box. I&rsquo;ll get them.</q></p>

<p>I drew in my useless oars, turned about
and cautiously wriggled up into the bow seat.</p>

<p><q>Look out for yourself! Don&rsquo;t bullfrog
out over the bow. I can&rsquo;t hold her any
steadier than this.</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, I&rsquo;m all right.</q></p>

<p>With one hand I gripped the gunwale, with
the other I felt down into the box and finally
fished out the required treasures. I worked
my way back into my own seat and tried a
screw-eye in the empty, rusted-out hole.</p>

<p>&ldquo;Does it
bite?<add><anchor id="E4"/><ref target="e4">&rdquo;</ref></add></p>

<p><q>I don&rsquo;t know about biting, but it&rsquo;s going
in beautifully&mdash;now it goes hard.</q></p>

<p><q>Perhaps I can give it a turn.</q></p>

<p><q>Perhaps you can&rsquo;t! Don&rsquo;t you stop rowing.
If this boat wasn&rsquo;t held steady, she&rsquo;d&mdash;I
don&rsquo;t know what she wouldn&rsquo;t do.</q></p>

<p><q>If you stick something through the eye
you can turn it.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes. I&rsquo;ll find
something<corr sic=","><anchor id="E5"/><ref target="e5">.</ref></corr>
Here&rsquo;s the can-opener.
<pb n="193"/><anchor id="Pg193"/>
Grand! There! It&rsquo;s solid. Now I&rsquo;ll
do the other one the same way. Hurrah for
the screw-eyes!</q></p>

<p><q>You thought of bringing them,</q> said
Jonathan magnanimously.</p>

<p><q>You thought of using them,</q> said I, not
to be outdone.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<p>And so again the imps were foiled. But
they hung over us, they slapped us with
spray, they tossed the whitecaps, jeering, at
our heads, over our shoulders, into our laps.
They put up the tides to tricks of eddies and
back-currents, so that they hindered instead
of helping, as by calculation they should
have done. They laid invisible hands on our
oars and dragged them down, or held them
up as the wave raced by, so that we missed
a stroke. Once, in the lee of an island, we
paused to rest and unroll our chart and get
our bearings, while the smooth rise and fall
of the ground swell was all there was to remind
us of the riot of water just outside.
Then we were off again, and the imps had
us. They were busy, those imps, all that long,
windy, wave-tossed, wonderful day.</p>
<pb n="194"/><anchor id="Pg194"/>

<p>For it was wonderful, and the imps were
indeed frustrate, wholly frustrate. We pulled
toward the quiet harbor that evening with
aching muscles, hair and clothes matted with
salt water, but spirits undaunted. Hungry,
too, for we had not been able to do more than
munch a few ship&rsquo;s biscuit while we rowed.
Wind, tide, waves, all against us, boat leaking,
oars disabled&mdash;and still&mdash;<q>Isn&rsquo;t it
great!</q> we said, <q>great&mdash;great!</q></p>

<p>Dusk was closing in and lights began to
blink along the western shore. We beached
on a sandy point and asked our way,&mdash;where
could we put up for the night? Children,
barelegged, waded out around the boat,
looking at us and our funny, laden craft, with
curious eyes. Yes, they said, there was an
inn, farther up the harbor, where we saw
those lights&mdash;ten minutes&rsquo; row, perhaps.
We pulled off again, stiffly.</p>

<p><q>Tired?</q> said Jonathan. <q>I&rsquo;ll take her
in.</q></p>

<p><q>Indeed you won&rsquo;t! Of course I&rsquo;m tired,
but I&rsquo;ve got to do something to keep warm.
And I want to get in. I want supper. They&rsquo;ll
all be in bed if we don&rsquo;t hurry.</q></p>
<pb n="195"/><anchor id="Pg195"/>

<p>Our tired muscles lent themselves mechanically
to their work and the boat slid across
the quiet waters of the moonlit harbor. The
town lights grew bigger, wharves loomed
above us, and soon we were gliding along
under their shadow. The eddies from our
oars went <hi rend="font-style: italic">lap-lap-lapping</hi>
off among the great
dark spiles and stirred up the keen smell of
salt-soaked timbers and seaweed. Blindly
groping, we found a rickety ladder, tied our
boat and climbed stiffly up, and there we
were on our feet again, feeling rather queer
and stretchy after seven hours in our cramped
quarters.</p>

<p>Half an hour later we were sitting in the
warm, clean kitchen of the old inn, and a
kindly but mystified hostess was mothering
us with eggs and ham and tea and pie and
doughnuts and other things that a New
England kitchen always contains. While we
ate she sat and rocked energetically, questioning
us with friendly curiosity and watching
us with keen though benevolent eyes.</p>

<p><q>Rowed, did you? Jim!</q> calling back over
her shoulder through a half-open door, <q>did
you hear that? These folks have rowed all
<pb n="196"/><anchor id="Pg196"/>
the way across the bay this afternoon&mdash;yes&mdash;rowed.
What say? Yes, <hi rend="font-style: italic">she</hi> rowed, too.
They say they&rsquo;re goin&rsquo; on to-morrow, round
Judith.</q></p>

<p><q>Say, now,</q> she finally appealed to us in
frank perplexity, <q>what&rsquo;re you doin&rsquo; it for?</q></p>

<p><q>We like it,</q> said Jonathan peacefully.</p>

<p><q>Like it, do you? Well, now, if that don&rsquo;t
beat all! Say&mdash;you know? I wouldn&rsquo;t do
that, what you&rsquo;re doin&rsquo;, not if you paid me.
Have another cup o&rsquo; tea, do.</q></p>

<p>The next morning she bade us good-bye
with the air of entrusting us to that Providence
which is known to have a special care
for children and fools.</p>

<p>In fact, through all the varying experiences
of our cruise, one thing never varied. That
was, the expression on the faces of the people
we met. Wind and water and coast and birds
all greeted us differently with each new day,
but no matter
<corr sic="now"><anchor id="E6"/><ref target="e6">how</ref></corr>
many new faces we met,
we found in them always the same look&mdash;a
look at once friendly and quizzical, the look
one casts upon nice children for whose antics
one is not responsible, the look one casts upon
very small dogs. Why? Is it so odd a thing
<pb n="197"/><anchor id="Pg197"/>
to like to row a little boat? If it had been a
yacht, now, or even a motor-boat, the expression
would have been different. Apparently
the oars were what did it.</p>

<p>On that particular morning, word of our
doings must have got abroad, for as we
stepped out on the brick sidewalk of the
shady main street a little crowd was waiting
for us. It was a funny procession:&mdash;Jonathan
first, with the guns and the water-jug,
then a boy with a wheelbarrow, on which
were piled the two dunnage bags, the metal
box, the lantern, the axe, the chart tube, and
a few other things. An old man and some
boys followed curiously, then I came, with
two big baking-powder cans, very gorgeous
because the red paper was not yet off them,
full of provisions pressed on us by our friendly
hostess. Tagging behind me, came an old
woman, a big girl, and a half-dozen children.
It was the kind of escort that usually attends
the hand-organ and monkey on their infrequent
visits.</p>

<p>We loaded up the boat and pulled off, a
little stiff but fairly fit after all. The group
waved us off and then stood obviously talking
<pb n="198"/><anchor id="Pg198"/>
us over. One of the men called after us,
with a sudden inspiration, <q>Pity ye&rsquo; hevn&rsquo;t
got a <hi rend="font-style: italic">motor</hi> in there!</q></p>

<p>Though we didn&rsquo;t want to be a motor-boat,
we were not above receiving courtesies
from one, and when the Providence tacitly
invoked by our hostess sent one chugging
along up to us, with the proposal to take us
in tow, we accepted with great contentment.
The morning was not half over when we made
our next landing, and looked up the captain
who was to tow us <q>around Judith.</q></p>

<p>For in the matter of Point Judith our
friends and advisers had been unanimously
firm. There should be a limit, they said, even
to the foolishness of a holiday plan. With a
light boat, we might have braved their disapproval,
but loaded as we were, we decided
to be prudent.</p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;d hate to lose the guns,</q> said Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>Yes, and the camera,</q> I added.</p>

<p>So we accepted the offer of a good friend&rsquo;s
knockabout, and sailed around the dreaded
Point with our little boat tailing behind at
the end of her rope. We saw no water that
we could not have met in her, but, as our
<pb n="199"/><anchor id="Pg199"/>
friends did not fail to point out, that proved
nothing whatever.</p>

<p>At Stonington we were left once more to
our little boat and our four oars, and there we
pulled her up and caulked her.</p>

<p>Strange, how we are always trying to avoid
mishaps, and yet when they come we are so
often glad of them! A leaky boat had not
been in our plans, but if we could change that
first wild row across the big bay, if we could
cut out that leakiness, that puddling bottom,
the difficult shifts of baling and rowing, would
we? We would not. Again, as we look back
over the days of our cruise, we could ill spare
those hours of labor on the hot stretch of
sunny beach between the wharves, where we
bent half-blinded over the dazzling white
boat, our spirits irritated, our fingers aching
as they worked at the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">push-push-push</hi> of the
cotton waste between the strakes. We said
hard words of the man who thought he had
put our boat in order for us, and yet&mdash;if we
could cut out those hours of grumbling toil,
would we? We would not. For one thing, we
should perhaps have missed the precious
word of advice given us by a man who sat and
<pb n="200"/><anchor id="Pg200"/>
watched us. He recommended us to put a
little motor in the stern. He pointed out to
us that rowing was pretty hard work. We
said we liked it. His face wore the expression
I have already described.</p>

<p>We launched her again at dusk. Next
morning Jonathan was a moment ahead of
me on the wharf.</p>

<p><q>Any water in her?</q> I called, following
hard.</p>

<p><q>Dry as a bone,</q> he shouted back, exultant;
but as I came up he added, with his
usual conservatism, <q>of course we can&rsquo;t tell
what she may do when she&rsquo;s loaded.</q></p>

<p>But our work held. For the rest of the trip
we had a dry boat, except for what came in
over the sides.</p>

<p>Now that we were in the home State, we
got out our guns and hugged the shore closely,
on the lookout for plover. We drifted sometimes,
while we studied our maps for the location
of the salt marshes. If we were lucky, we
had broiled birds for luncheon or supper; if
we were not, we had tinned stuff, which is distinctly
inferior. When we spent the night at
an inn, we breakfasted there, but most of our
<pb n="201"/><anchor id="Pg201"/>
meals were eaten along the shore, or, best of
all, on some island.</p>

<p><q>Can we find an island for lunch to-day, do
you suppose?</q> I usually asked, as we dipped
our oars in the morning.</p>

<p><q>Do you have to have an island for lunch?</q></p>

<p><q>I love an island!</q> choosing to ignore the
jest. <q>That&rsquo;s one of the best things about a
boat&mdash;that it takes you to islands.</q></p>

<p><q>Now, why an island?</q></p>

<p><q>You know as well as I do. An island
means&mdash;oh, it means remoteness, it means
quiet&mdash;possession; while you&rsquo;re on it, it&rsquo;s
yours&mdash;you don&rsquo;t have every passer-by
looking over your shoulder&mdash;you have a
little world all to yourself.</q></p>

<p>I could feel Jonathan&rsquo;s indulgent smile
through the back of his head as he rowed.</p>

<p><q>Well, you know yourself,</q> I argued.
<q>Even a tiny bit of stone and earth, with
moss on it, and a flower, out in the middle of
a brook, looks different, somehow, from the
same things on the bank. It
<hi rend="font-style: italic">is</hi> different&mdash;it&rsquo;s
an island.</q></p>

<p>And so we sought islands&mdash;sometimes
little ones, all rocks, too little even to have
<pb n="202"/><anchor id="Pg202"/>
collected driftwood for a fire, too little to have
grown anything but wisps of beach-grass,
low enough to be covered, perhaps, by the
highest tides. Sometimes it was a larger
island, big enough to have bushes on it, and
beaches round its edges. One of these we
remember as best of all. It lay a mile off
shore, a long island, rocky at its ocean end
and at its land end running out to a long
slim line of curving beach. In the middle it
rose to a plateau, thick-set with grass and
goldenrod and bay bushes, from which
floated the gay, sweet voices of song sparrows.
Ah! There was an island for you! And
we made a fire of driftwood, and cooked our
luncheon, and lay back on the sand and
drowsed, while the sea-gulls, millions of them,
circled curiously over our heads, mewing and
screaming as they dived and swooped, and
behind us the notes of the song sparrows rose
sweet.</p>

<p>If we had had water enough in our jug, we
should have camped there. We rowed away
at last, slowly, loving it, and in our thoughts
we still possess it. As it dropped astern I
pulled in my oars and stood up to take its
<pb n="203"/><anchor id="Pg203"/>
picture&mdash;no easy task, with the boat mounting
and plunging among the swells. But I
have my picture, its horizon line at a noticeable
slant, reminiscent of my unsteady balance.
It means little to other people, but to
us it means the sweetness of sunshine and
wind and water, the sweetness of grass and
bird-notes, all breathed over by the spirit of
solitude.</p>

<p>Then it melted away&mdash;our island&mdash;into
the waste of waters, and we turned to look
toward the misty headlands beyond our bow.
Where the marshlands were, we followed
them closely, but where the shore was rocky,
or, worse still, built up with summer cottages,
we often made a straight course from
headland to headland, keeping well out, often
a mile or two, to avoid tide eddies. We liked
the feeling of being far out, the shore a dark
blue, the cottages little dots. But we liked it,
too, when the headland before us grew large,
its rocks and bushes stood out, and we could
see the white rip off its point&mdash;a rip to be
taken with some caution if we hoped to keep
our cargo dry. And then, the rip passed, if
the bay beyond curved in quiet and uninhabited,
<pb n="204"/><anchor id="Pg204"/>
how we loved to turn and pull along
close to shore, watching its beaches and sand-cliffs
draw smoothly away beside our stern,
or, best of all, pulling about and running in
till our bow grated and we jumped to the wet
beach and ran up the cliff to look about. Such
moments bring in a peculiar way the thrill of
discovery. It is one thing to go along a coast
by land, and learn its ways so. It is a good
thing. But it is quite another to fare over its
waters and turn in upon it from without,
surprising its secrets as from another world.</p>

<p>But to do this, your boat must be a little
one. As soon as you have a real keel, the case
is altered. For a keel demands a special landing-place&mdash;a
wharf&mdash;and a wharf means
human habitation, and then&mdash;where is your
thrill of discovery? Ah, no!&mdash;a little boat!
And you can land anywhere, among rocks
or in sandy shallows; you can explore the tide
creeks and marshes and the little rivers; you
can beach wherever you like, wherever the
rippling waves themselves can go. A little
boat for romance!</p>

<p>A little boat, but a long cruise, as long as
may be. To be sure, a boat and a bit of water
<pb n="205"/><anchor id="Pg205"/>
anywhere is good. Even an errand across the
pond and back may be a joy. But if you can,
now and then, free yourself from the there-and-back
habit, the reward is great. The joy
of pilgrimage&mdash;of going, not there and back,
but on, and on, and yet on&mdash;is a joy by itself.
The thought that each night brings
sleep in a new and unforeseen spot, with a new
journey on the morrow, gives special flavor
to the journeying.</p>

<p>Not the least among the pleasures of the
cruise were the night-camps. When the shore
looked inviting, and harborage at an inn
seemed doubtful, we pulled our boat above
tide-water, turned her over and tilted her up
on her side for a wind-break, and there we
spent the night. The half-emptied dunnage
bags were our pillows, the sand was our bed.
Sand, to sleep on, is harder than one might
suppose, but it is better than earth in being
easily scooped out to suit one&rsquo;s needs. Indeed,
even on a pneumatic mattress, I should hardly
have slept much that first night. It was a
new experience. The great world of waters
was so close that it seemed, all night long,
like a wonderful but ever importunate presence.
<pb n="206"/><anchor id="Pg206"/>
The wind blew that night, too, and
there was a low-scudding rack, and a half-smothered
moon. As we rolled ourselves
up in our blankets and rubber sheets and settled
down, I looked out over the restless
water.</p>

<p><q>The bay seems very full to-night&mdash;brimming,</q>
I said.</p>

<p><q>Not brimming over, though,</q> said Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>I should hope not! But it does seem to
me there are very few inches between it and
our feet.</q></p>

<p><q>And the tide is still rising, of course,</q>
said Jonathan, by way of comfort.</p>

<p><q>Jonathan, I know just where high-tide
mark is, and we&rsquo;re fully twelve inches above
it.</q></p>

<p>Silence.</p>

<p><q>Aren&rsquo;t we?</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, was that a question?</q> murmured
Jonathan. <q>Why, yes, I think we are at least
that.</q></p>

<p><q>Of course, there are extra high tides
sometimes.</q></p>

<p>Silence.</p>
<pb n="207"/><anchor id="Pg207"/>

<p><q>Jonathan, do you know when they come?</q></p>

<p><q>Not exactly.</q></p>

<p><q>Well, I don&rsquo;t care. I love it, anyway.
Only it seems so much bigger and colder at
night, the water does.</q></p>

<p>At last I drowsed, waking now and then to
raise my head and just glance down at those
waves&mdash;they certainly sounded as if they
were lapping the sand close by my ear. No,
there they were, quite within bounds, fully
twenty feet away from my toes. Of course it
was all right. I slept again, and dreamed that
the tide rose and rose; the waves ran merrily
up the beach, ran up on both sides of us,
closed in behind us. We were lying on a little
sand island, and the waves nibbled at its
edges&mdash;nibbled and nibbled and nibbled&mdash;the
island was being nibbled up. This would
never do! We must move! And I woke.
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Ripple, ripple, swash!</hi>
<hi rend="font-style: italic">ripple, ripple, swash!</hi>
went the unconscious waves. As I raised my
head I saw the pale beach stretching off under
the moon-washed mists of middle night. Reassured,
I sank back, and when I waked again
the big sun was well above the rim of the
waters and all the little waves were dancing
<pb n="208"/><anchor id="Pg208"/>
and the wet curves of the beach were gleaming
in the new day.</p>

<p>The water was not always restless at night.
The next time we camped we found a little
harbor within a harbor, a crescent curve of
fine white sand ending in a point of rock. In
one of its clefts we made our fire and broiled
our plover, ranging them on spits of bay so
that they hung over the two edges of rock
like people looking down into a miniature
Grand CaÃ±on. There were nine of them, fat
and sputtering, and while they cooked, we
made toast and arranged the camp. Then
we had supper, and watched the red coals
smouldering and the white moonlight filling
the world with a radiance that put out the
stars and brought the blue back to the sky.
The little basin of the bay was quiet as a pool,
the air was full of stillness, with now and then
the hushed <hi rend="font-style: italic">flip-flip</hi>
of a tiny wave that had
somehow strayed in from the tumbling crowd
outside.</p>

<p>We slept well, but once Jonathan waked
me. <q>Look!</q> he whispered, <q>White heron.</q></p>

<p>I raised my head. There, quite near us in
the shallow water, stood a great pale bird,
<pb n="209"/><anchor id="Pg209"/>
motionless, on one long, slim leg, his oval
body, long neck, head and bill clearly outlined
against the bright water beyond. The
mirror of the water reflected perfectly the
soft outline, making a double creature, one
above and one below, with that slim stem of
leg between.</p>

<p>I watched him until my neck grew tired.
He never moved. Out beyond him, more dim,
stood his mate, motionless too. Now and
then they called to each other, with queer,
harsh talk that made the stillness all the
stiller when it closed in again.</p>

<p>When we awoke, they were gone, but we
found the heronry that morning on one of the
oak-covered knolls that rise like islands out of
the heart of the great salt marshes.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<p>All through the cruise, the big winds were
with us more than we had expected. They
gave us, for the most part, a right good time.
For even in the partly protected Sound it is
possible to stir up a sea rough enough to keep
one busy. Each wave, as it came galloping
up, was an antagonist to be dealt with. If
we met it successfully, it galloped on, and left
<pb n="210"/><anchor id="Pg210"/>
us none the worse for it. If we did not, it
meant, perhaps, that its foaming white mane
brushed our shoulders, or swept across our
laps, or, worse still, drowned our guns. Once,
indeed, we were threatened with something a
little more serious. We were running down out
of the Connecticut River, gliding smoothly
over sleek water. It was delicious rowing, and
the boat shot along swiftly. As we turned
westward, it grew rougher, but we were paying
no special heed to this when suddenly I
became conscious of something dark over my
right shoulder. I turned my head, and found
myself looking up into the evil heart of a dull
green breaker. I gasped, <q>Look out!</q> and
dug my oar. Jonathan glanced, pulled, there
was a moment of doubt, then the huge dark
bulk was shouldering heavily away, off our
starboard quarter. It was only the first of
its ugly company. Through sheer carelessness,
we had run, as it were, into an ambush&mdash;one
of the worst bits of water on the Sound,
where tide and river currents meet and
wrangle. All around us were rearing, white-maned
breakers, though the impression we
got was less of their white manes than of their
<pb n="211"/><anchor id="Pg211"/>
dark sides as they rose over us. Our problem
was to meet each one fairly, and yet snatch
every moment of respite to slant off toward
the harborage inside the breakwaters. It took
all our strength and all our skill, and all the
resources of the good little boat. But we
made it, after perhaps half an hour of stiff
work. Then we rested, breathed, and went
on. We did not talk much about it until we
made camp that night. Then, as we sat looking
out over the quiet water, I told Jonathan
about the shadow over my shoulder.</p>

<p><q>It was like seeing a ghost,</q>
I said,&mdash;<q>no&mdash;more
like feeling the hand of an enemy
on your shoulder.</q></p>

<p><q>The Black Douglas,</q> suggested Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>Yes. Talk about the scientific attitude&mdash;you&rsquo;ve
just got to personify things when they
come at you like that. That wave had an expression&mdash;an
ugly one. I don&rsquo;t wonder the
Northmen felt as they did about the sea and
the waves. They took it all personally&mdash;they
had to!</q></p>

<p><q>Were you frightened?</q> asked Jonathan.</p>

<p><q>No, of course not,</q> I said, almost too
promptly. Then I meditated&mdash;<q>I don&rsquo;t
<pb n="212"/><anchor id="Pg212"/>
know what you&rsquo;d call it&mdash;but I believe I
understand now what people mean when they
talk about their hearts going down into their
boots.</q></p>

<p><q>Did yours?</q></p>

<p><q>Why, not exactly&mdash;but&mdash;well&mdash;it certainly
did feel suddenly very thick and heavy&mdash;as
if it had dropped&mdash;perhaps an inch
or two.</q></p>

<p><q>I believe,</q> said Jonathan gently, <q>you
might almost call that being frightened.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, perhaps you might. Tell me&mdash;were
you?</q></p>

<p><q>I didn&rsquo;t like it&mdash;yes, I was anxious&mdash;and
it made me tired to have been such a fool&mdash;the
whole thing was absolutely unnecessary,
if we&rsquo;d looked up the charts carefully.</q></p>

<p><q>Or asked a few questions. But you know
you hate to ask questions.</q></p>

<p><q>You could have asked them.</q></p>

<p><q>Well, anyway, aren&rsquo;t you glad it happened?</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, of course; it was an experience.</q></p>

<p><q>Do you want to do it again?</q></p>

<p><q>No</q>&mdash;he was emphatic&mdash;<q>not with
that load.</q></p>
<pb n="213"/><anchor id="Pg213"/>

<p><q>Neither do I.</q></p>

<p>If the winds sometimes wearied us a little,
they helped us, too. We can never forget the
evening we turned into the Thames River,
making for the shelter of a friend&rsquo;s hospitable
roof. We had battled most of that day with
the diagonal onslaughts of a southeast gale,
bringing with it the full swing of the ocean
swell. It was easier than a southwester would
have been, but that was the best that could
be said for it.</p>

<p>We passed the last buoy and turned our
bow north. And suddenly, the great waves
that had all day kept us on the defensive became
our strong helpers. They took us up and
swung us forward on our course with great
sweeping rushes of motion. The tide was
setting in, too, and with that and our oars
we were going almost as fast as the waves
themselves, so that when one picked us up,
it swung us a long way before it left us. We
learned to watch for each roller, wait till one
came up astern, then pull with all our might
so that we went swooping down its long slope,
its crest at first just behind our stern, but
drawing more and more under us, until it
<pb n="214"/><anchor id="Pg214"/>
passed beyond our bow and dropped us in the
trough to wait for the next giant. It was like
going in a swing, but with the downward rush
very long and swift, and the upward rise short
and slow. How long it took us to make the
two miles to our friend&rsquo;s dock we shall never
know. Probably only a few minutes. But it
was not an experience in time. We had a
sense of being at one with the great primal
forces of wind and water, and at one with
them, not in their moments of poise, but in
their moments of resistless power.</p>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="stars: 5"/>

<p>After all, the only drawback to the cruise
was that it was over too soon. When, in the
quiet afternoon light of the last day, a familiar
headland floated into view, my first feeling
was one of joy; for beyond that headland,
what friendly faces waited for us&mdash;faces
turned even now, perhaps, toward the east for
a first glimpse of our little boat. But hard
after this, came a pang of regret&mdash;it was
over, our water-pilgrimage, and I wanted it
to go on.</p>

<p>It was over. And yet, not really over after
all. I sometimes think that pleasures ought
<pb n="215"/><anchor id="Pg215"/>
to be valued according to whether they are
over when they <hi rend="font-style: italic">are</hi>
over, or not. <q>You cannot
eat your cake and have it too.</q> True, but
that is because it is cake. There are other
things which you can eat, and still have. And
our rowboat cruise is one of these. It is over,
and yet it is not over. It never will be. I can
shut my eyes&mdash;indeed, I do not need even
to shut them&mdash;and again I am under the
open sky, I am afloat in the sun and the wind,
with the waters all around me. I see again
the surf-edged curves of the beaches, the lines
of the sand-cliffs, the ragged horizon edge,
cut and jagged by the waves. I feel the boat,
I feel the oars, I am aware of the damp, pure
night air, and the sounds of the waves ceaselessly
breaking on the sand.</p>

<p>It is not over. Its best things are still ours,
and those things which were hardly pleasures
then have become such now. As we remember
our aching muscles and blistered hands, we
smile. As we recall times of intense weariness,
of irritation, of anxiety, we find ourselves
lingering over them with enjoyment. For
memory does something wonderful with experience.
It is a poet, and life is its raw
<pb n="216"/><anchor id="Pg216"/>
material. I know that our cruise was made up
of minutes, of oar-strokes, so many that to
count them would be weariness unending. But
in my memory, these things are re-created.
I see a boundless stretch of windy or peaceful
waters. I see the endless line of misty coast.
I see lovely islands, sleeping alone, waiting
to be possessed by those who come. And I see
a little, little boat, faring along the coast-lands,
out to the islands, over the waters&mdash;going
on, and on, and on.</p>

<milestone unit="tb"/>

<p rend="text-align: center">THE END</p>

<!-- <pb n="217"/><anchor id="Pg217"/>
Blank Page -->
</div>

</body>

<back>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right; text-align: center" id="colophon">
    <index index="toc"/>
    <index index="pdf"/>
    <head rend="text-align: center">Colophon</head>

    <pb n="218"/><anchor id="Pg218"/>
    <p rend="font-size: small">The Riverside Press</p>

    <p rend="font-size: x-small">CAMBRIDGE . MASSACHUSETTS</p>

    <p rend="font-size: x-small">U . S . A</p>
  </div>

  <div rend="page-break-before: right; text-align: center" id="appendix">
    <index index="toc"/>
    <index index="pdf"/>
    <head rend="text-align: center">Appendix A: Extra Front Pages</head>
    <pb n="i"/><anchor id="Pgi"/>
    
    <p rend="font-size: small">
    By Elisabeth Woodbridge</p>

    <milestone unit="tb" rend="rule: 10%"/>
    
    <p rend="font-size: xx-small">MORE JONATHAN PAPERS.<lb/>
    THE JONATHAN PAPERS.</p>
    
    <p rend="font-size: x-small">HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY<lb/>
    <hi rend="font-size: xx-small; font-variant: small-caps">
      Boston And New York
    </hi></p>

    <milestone unit="tb"/>

    <pb n="ii"/><anchor id="Pgii"/>
    
    <p>More Jonathan Papers</p>

    <!-- <pb n="iii"/><anchor id="Pgiii"/>
    Blank Page -->
  </div>

  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <index index="toc"/>
    <index index="pdf"/>
    <head rend="text-align: center">Errata</head>
  
    <list><anchor id='e1'/>
      <item>Chapter VII</item>
      <item>Changed camp is <hi rend="font-weight: bold"><ref
      target="E1">4.38</ref></hi>&mdash;<hi rend="font-variant:
      small-caps">A.M.</hi> to camp is <hi rend="font-weight:
      bold">4:38</hi>&mdash;<hi rend="font-variant:
      small-caps">A.M.</hi></item>
    </list>
    
    <list><anchor id='e2'/>
      <item>Chapter VII</item>
      <item>Changed arrives at <hi rend="font-weight: bold"><ref
      target="E2">10.15</ref></hi>, they to arrives at <hi
      rend="font-weight: bold">10:15</hi>, they</item>
    </list>
    
    <list><anchor id='e3'/>
      <item>Chapter VII</item>
      <item>Changed What does <hi rend="font-weight: bold"><ref
      target="E3">10.15</ref></hi> look to What does <hi
      rend="font-weight: bold">10:15</hi> look</item>
    </list>
    
    <list><anchor id='e4'/>
      <item>Chapter VIII</item>
      <item>Changed &ldquo;Does it bite?<ref target="E4">&nbsp;</ref> to
      &ldquo;Does it bite?<hi rend="font-weight: bold">&rdquo;</hi>
      </item>
    </list>
    
    <list><anchor id='e5'/>
      <item>Chapter VIIII</item>
      <item>Changed find something<hi rend="font-weight:
      bold"><ref target="E5">,</ref></hi> Here&rsquo;s to find
      something<hi rend="font-weight: bold">.</hi> Here&rsquo;s</item>
    </list>
    
    <list><anchor id='e6'/>
      <item>Chapter VIIII</item>
      <item>Changed no matter <hi rend="font-weight: bold"><ref
      target="E6">now</ref></hi> many to no matter <hi rend="font-weight:
      bold">how</hi> many</item>
    </list>
  </div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<divGen type="pgfooter" />
</div>

</back>

</text>

</TEI.2>

<!--
A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 20141-tei.txt or 20141-tei.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/0/1/4/20141/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
— you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.


THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.

This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder. Information on the
copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use imposed by
the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the beginning of this
work.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
-->
